Gell taccuino 6 pag 001

Front cover with shield and Arabic

Gell taccuino 6 pag 002

Inside front cover with full-length portrait and Arabic


Gell taccuino 6 pag 003

Spain
1808
Portugal
1810
[Kufic Arabic]

Mariano deVez

Gell taccuino 6 pag 004, 005

Fold-out colour map of Spain and Portugal
Regni di Spagna e di Portogallo


Gell taccuino 6 pag 006, 007, 008

Fold-out, annotated pen and ink drawings with watercolour: Arab costume
Form & ornaments of the outer Cloak of The Arabs called Abās


Gell taccuino 6 pag 009
Printed image
Al ruido solo de Españolas Ratas,			
Temblan los Bravos de Austerliz y Jena.	
Por exemplar castigo, el cielo ordena
Que pague el Vocinglero sus bravatas. 
given by Duque de Villa Hermosa
Famosa Expedicion RATERA de los Gavachos.
El dia 5 de Julio al amanecer, el centinela que estaba á la Puerta del teatro del Buen Retiro dió parte de que se advertia dentro de aquella casa un ruido espantoso. Este aviso produxo un alarma en todos los franceses. El valeroso General que mandó la expedicion, inmediatamente ordenó que se tocase la generala y que atacasen aquella fortaleza dos mil hombres de Infanteria y Caballeria, con dos Cañones. Abrieron las puertas con efecto, y salieron una multitude de Ratas, que se habian apoderado de los Toneles de galleta de los invictos guerreros.
Gell taccuino 6 pag 010

Blank page

Gell taccuino 6 pag 011

Kings of Granada 1 Mahomad Alhamar 1263
KG 2 Mahomad Miralmuznulin 1302 Alhambra finished
KG 3 Mahomad Abenhalamar
KG 4 Mahomad Abanazar 1313				says
5 KG Ismael 1322					GUERRAS CIVILES
KG 6 Mahomad	1343
7 KG Juzef azen Hamer 1354
KG 8 Mahomed Lagus 1360
KG 9 Mahomed Abenhalamar 1362
7 KG Mahomad Lagus 2d time 1379
KG 10 Mahomad Guadi x 1362
KG 11 Juzef II 1395 poisoned by K of Fez in a marlota
KG 12 Mahomed Abenibalba 1408	
KG 13 Juzef III 1423

KG 14 Mahomad Abenazarel Isquierdo
deposed 1427
KG 15 Mahomad Pequeño 1430
KG 16 Abenazar izqiuerdo 1445
2d time
K. 17 Abenozmin el Coxo nephew of Mahomad Isquierdo

Aben K. 18. Ismail =
19. K. Muley Hassan	 = Zagal?
reigned in Alhambra
Maza a nat. Son
Boabdelim Rey Chico K.G. reigned in Albaycin

Gell taccuino 6 pag 012

Colour map of Spain and Portugal
HISPANIA VETUS,
ad Julii Caesaris Commentaria
Auctore Joanne a Cruce,
Catholici Hispaniarū Regis Geographo
e Regiâ Artium Academiâ.
M. DCC. LXXXVIII.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 013

2 Kings of Spain. Caliphs. &c
3
4
5
6
7
8 Caliphs. Cordova houses No of. Height of Sierra Nevada
9 Romances. Adarga &c. Abencerraga killed. Arabic names, Offices. Fernando de Pulgar Ave Maria.
10
11
12
13 Spanish Vara.
14
15
16
17
18
19 Toledo MS.
20
21 Arab Spanish names. List of Arab books.
22 Alhambra founder. Mosque. Bibataubin. Cufic.
23 names of Spanish places. Animals &c
24 palace Segovia. Belludo.
25 Greek names. Senanus story.
26 Moors by Sr. A. Brooke. Moorish Kings.
27 Arab words in Spanish. Verses.
28 Moorish words in Spanish. Moorish Kings
29
30 Sierra Morena.
31
32
33
34
35 all History. Mahomet.
36
37
38
39
40. Moors – The drum. Inquisition – Alhama derivatn.
41 Malaga – Arches [drawing: arch] & [drawing: arch]
91 Aben Habuz


Gell taccuino 6 pag 014

Blank page

Gell taccuino 6 pag 015

Pen and ink drawing: view of A Coruña
Citadel.	River Pasaja	Isthmus	St Lucia
Margin: Coarse Granite
The town of Corunna is placed on a peninsula which joins a high knoll to the main land
The port is very secure. The ancient name was Adabicum. About 5 miles up the river which falls into the port S of the town is a bridge of 13 arches & near it was the town of Brigantium –
The Country though rocky seems to produce figs grapes melons capsicums &c in great abundance in September.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 016

196
+
decreasing daily as that of Madrid will at length entirely supersede it. The soil is sandy (and the rocks entirely of coarse granite) like that of Falmouth –

Pen and ink drawing: fountain
Fountain	

North of the Town in the way to the tower of Hercules or new light house is a fountain ornamented like those of Greece. The base seems Roman upon which some statues or other modern additions have been placed, now destroyed –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 017

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: church
Gate of St. Yago Corunna.

The Church of St Yago at Corunna. The Saint is represented driving the Moors before Him. The Church contains several altars & a large organ but is not handsome. Thermometer 76 Sep 22d.


Gell taccuino 6 pag 018

194
Pen and ink drawing: landscape with tower
TOWER OF [HERCULES CORUNNA]

Pencil, pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man and mule
GALEGO

Gell taccuino 6 pag 019

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
[TOWER OF] HERCULES CORUNNA		Cape Prior		Fèrrol

Pen and ink drawing: house
A Country house of D Juan de Barila Monastery opposite Corunna
This house was at least 10 miles distant but was drawn with a camera lucida fixid to a Telescope.

Pen and ink drawing: oxen
Corunna

Pen and ink drawing: oxen
Corunna

Gell taccuino 6 pag 020

192
Pencil drawing: street scene and quayside

Pen and ink interior plan
Venta de Ordines
Farm Yard
Road to St Yago

Gell taccuino 6 pag 021

Pen and ink drawing: street scene
Sep 24 Vill of Caral 5 leagues from Coruña

Quitting Corunna at 6 in the morning of Septr 24th in a coach drawn by 6 mules, Our passports from the junta were examined at the gate. At 20 minutes before 7 reach Palavia, where we had dined the day before, landing at the mouth of the river of Paçaje
Our mules were called Valerosa ‘Ortolana Palagrina Gagliarda Platena & Cahona or Cajona.

Pen and ink drawing: house
Venta de Ordines		Sep 24

and ascending among vineyards chestnuts & hedges of Baytree. Our host was named Don Juan de Barila and treated us magnificently at his Villa. Each course consisted of 18 dishes –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 022

190
Pass a kind of Barrier but no toll was taken. At 10 minutes to 7 the road to Madrid by Betancos turns off L. The country is very well cultivated. Maize in abundance. Some Pines.
At 7 past 7 in a bottom a stream running to the left. Pretty Villas & vineyards, Chest nuts Walnuts & Oaks. The cloaks of the peasants going to market very becoming. At 35 p 7 after a steep hill in a bottom, a river runs to L. A fine valley with a Mt in the centre
A high mountain bounds the vale on S. At 5 to 8 pass the 2 league stone [drawing: league stone]. At 10 to 9 stops at the village of Carral – 10 past 9 proceed. At 20 p 9 the 3d League stone. the valley delightful with gardens & orchards. Black sheep. Chestnuts. At 25 past 9 cross a clear stream running to L. many houses. 18 p 10 cross a ravine [drawing: ravine] after a terrible ascent from the stream. The road always good –

Margin:
Villa Boa
Pen and ink drawing: woman

Gell taccuino 6 pag 023

At 25m to 11 pass the 4th stone on the top of the mountain which is bleak & like a Westmoreland Moor. rainy & cold
Maize. At 15 p 11 the streams run toward the South. Several poor Inns or Ventas in the way. A Village & at 18 to 12 the 5th stone [drawing: league stone]. The country is very poor in appearance but does not want habitations even at this elevation. At 15 p 12 the Venta di Ordines on the road side where we stopped to refresh. The house is entered by a porch, next a passage appears on R of which is the stable the mules eating with their heads towards the kitchen which is on the L. Above the stable is a room with 3 windows, 4 beds of straw on wooden frames, two tables, a chest & some chairs to sit upon, A deal cross & two pictures of the Virgin.

Margin:
The whole or nearly all the country is enclosed but the mode of tillage seems to be to cultivate each field once in 5 years in which interval it becomes full of high furze & heath & appears quite neglected. It is then pared & burned.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 024

188
24 often rainy in
Eggs wine & bread were to be found & they made us an excellent omelet. Many soldiers were on the road to join the Galician army at Coruña. At 25 minutes to 2 proceed. 25 p 2 X a stream running to R, a Village before it. 3 to 3qu larger stream & house. 7 p 3 X [drawing: arch bridge] river runs R [drawing: map] 45 p 3 7th League. 7 to 4 a Vill & church +. in a Valley on R a river is seen. 15 p 4 X [drawing: arch bridge] runs R. a village & X a great [drawing: arch bridge] Tambra to L. 25 p 4 a grove on R full of men women & oxen, making a very picturesque appearance, probably a fair where oxen were sold for the people were leading them home in every direction.
45 p 4 Venta 8 leagues. At 6h a few houses & place like an encampment on a hill R. X a [drawing: arch bridge] running R. A Venta. 5m to 6 9 league stone cultivation improves. At 6h on a hill see St Yago de Compostella one an eminence & ornamted by 6 spires – At 20 p 6, enter

Gell taccuino 6 pag 025

the city & lodge at the Casa de Portugueses – where the people were very civil – The bill for 3 persons & two Servants for Lodging 2 night 2 dinners & two breakfasts, was 198 reals or about 10 dollars. The Napoleon was on the staircase & the performer was subject to the inspection of passengers – Our passports were examined with an apology for the times which made it necessary. On walking out to see the Cathedral we asked the way & a person shewed it us. A second joined us & then a third who introduced us to the Junta in the College. They were very civil & much pleased with the head of the king on a halfpenny. They complained that more money had been sent to Corunna instead of to the central Junta. The view from the court of the College of the

Margin:
25 Sep at St Yago rain almost all day
Verses handed about at Dn Juan Berillas dinner
Por Pracmatica sancion
Se ha mandado publicar
De que el vasa de cagar
Se llame: Napoleon:
Y, por la misma razon
Por esta Ley, se decreta
Se publique en la Gazeta
En un capitulo à parte
Que se llame Buonaparte
Toda comun ou secreta
Mandase publicar pra. qe. el language sea general.

It was plain that no money was wanted in Spain for none of the English money had ever been sent from Corunna to the army.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 026

186
towers of the Cathedral was striking. We visited the Plaza Mayor on the N side of the cathedral. A very small part of the ancient building remains of the W end of the Cathedral, more Saxon than Gothic. [drawing: building] but within at this end is a very fine screen with [drawing: arch] arches round which the heavenly choir are carved, with harps &c. The Cathedral is not more than two centuries old & besides being very large is the finest pile of building in the style of Inigo Jones I ever saw. The roof is entirely of fine white uncoloured stone with [drawing: arch] arches, sometimes not quite regular. It is very lofty so as to have the proportions of a Gothic church. The Shrine of St Jago is entirely of silver, the body is buried below. There is a very fine organ. St Jago was seen in a vision driving the Moors out of Spain.

Margin:
Pen and ink plan: Santiago de Compostela

Free Stone
a building in which the metopes are windows

Pen and ink drawing: tower
A tower of the cathedral hangs on in this manner

Encima la sacristia de la catedral de Santiago y sobre un arco toral de la obra vieja. Para gloria de Dios acabó esta obra Miguel de Bozllar natural de S. Miguel de Areno. Año de 1245.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 027

as represented over the door of his church at Coruña in the 8th century as we were told – Almost every building in the City is in the same stile of architecture, all very massive but some highly ornamented. The humidity of the climate has taken much from the beauty of many of the edifices. Upon the whole perhaps there is no provincial town better adorned with fine buildings. The Seminary N of the great square is very magnificent & regular, an academy makes the E side the splendid cathedral the S & an Hospital excellently provided with beds & assistance for the sick, has a very noble front to the E of the Square. We heard music in the Cathedral from the Archbishops tribunal, with

Margin:
Alhagib captain of Kg of Cordova entered Galicia & sacked St Yago & took the great bells to the mosque at Cordova but in 1236 D. Fernando retook them & made the Moors carry them back on their shoulders.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 028

184
his Sister, a good humoured old Lady who never ceased talking during the whole Service. [Pen and ink drawing: woman] The people were astonished at our dining at five, and came before we had finished to conduct us to the Cathedral to hear singing & .. Un Capon. We saw the convent of the Benedictines near the cathedral a very magnificent building of the Inigo Jones doric order. It had several courts & a very fine library in which were the books forbidden by the Inquisition about 150 feet long. The stair case to it was the most solid I ever saw. There are 100 monks who have immense revenues & 100 servants. The church is large, very lofty & not handsome. The roof vaulted & there is a perfectly flat arch [drawing: arch] of 14 yards across over one part. Margin: The inner line shews by how little this must hang

Gell taccuino 6 pag 029

27 Sep
Pen and ink drawing: tower
BETANCOS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 030

178
two hills like stations [drawing: hills] seen
the bay rather [pencil, pen and ink drawing: ‘Entrance of Pacaje’]
pretty, & perfectly landlocked. At 11m to 10 the 3d league, abt 10h the [drawing] close L. 28 p 10 a + L see & descend to Betanços entirely surrounded with vines. met a coach & 7 mules
Pen and ink drawing: view of Betanzos
Margin: Tamarisk bushes in the bed of the river
the town is in the bottom of a valley on the R bank of the river. A [drawing: arch bridge] with several tamarisk bushes. At 10 p 11 arrive in the town, full of Vines & terraces. The Plaza is full of Posadas Posada della Cruz. del Sole. de la Aurora & ours of L’Estrella, a very good house where they killed 2 chickens, scalded off the feathers & made a very good stew with potatoes, & an omelet with Tomatas for which 2 of us & 2 servants paid 2 dollars & about 6 pence; There is a building

Gell taccuino 6 pag 031

Sep 29

Pencil drawing: oxen

for the view. A village cross it. Margin: Qu Castro
40 p 6 15th League river beautiful.
5 to 7 Vill [drawing: arch bridge] to R		20 p 7 Vill R.
35 p 7 X [drawing: arch bridge] of a Rivr running R. 5 to 8 Vill R & 16th League. 12 p 8 Vill 1 mile R. a better country. 24 p 8 Vill R. 2 p 9 Valley X [drawing: arch bridge], river runs to R a Village.
League 17. ascend. heath. 10h a Vill. 5 p 10 X [drawing: arch bridge] to R. 30 p 10 League 10. Stream on R runs back to the Minho in a glen. Minho strikes off. 5 p 11 Vill. Glen, descent.
chestnuts, mountains rise finely
17 p 11 X [drawing: arch bridge] at bottom of Vall. The Riv runs to R. League 19 at 20m ascend. At 

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man and mule
LEATHERN Dress OF THE MANCHEGANS LIKE A SUIT OF RUSTY ARMOUR.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 032

170
30 p 12 a stream & [drawing: arch bridge] runs L. a toll bar, a Vill R.
40 p 11 steep ascent Village Costantin. 10 p 12 very long ascent curious Gothic Rock very like a ruin*. Small vill near it R. 3 Villages R & pretty Valley. still ascend. 20 to 1 top Glen & houses L. 10 to 1 League 20. The river in the new valley runs back 9m to Asturias; perhaps into the Minho. 20 p 1 arrive at Santa Isabella. A very wretched Venta with only one room a travelling hurdy gurdy man, very civil drivers of oxen. hens cat dog & pig all in the room. A great caldron on the fire boiling potatoes greens &c. for the pigs.
At 15 p 4 quit St Isabella. very fine Mountains [Margin: A high cold place] on getting into next valley. The hills very lofty but up to the top cultivated, the bottoms full of chestnut trees. descend, Vill L. [Margin: Better climate]
10 p 4 Vill. fine view & chestnuts.
20 p 4 Vill up another branch of Vale L 3 miles dist & large 35 p 4 21 leagues & pretty Vill L. 40 p 4 X a magnificent bridge over a bottom called

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: women
Women of Sta Isabella beating hemp

Gell taccuino 6 pag 033

Pen and ink drawing: landscape with arch bridge
PUENTA DE CORZUN
finished 8 years ago						village
This the English shortly afterwards attempted To blow up & failed so that the french passed with all their artillery & harassed Sir Jon Moores flying army all the way to Corunna.

long ascent, pretty bottom, all along which are watered meadows. [drawing: map] The river runs with the road. ascend. 10 p 5 a Vill down a dreadful descent L [drawing: valley] quit that valley & turn over a top into another where the river joins the last & both run towards Asturias North.

Pen and ink drawing: valley
Along this road the English fled

Gell taccuino 6 pag 034

168
The country like Achaia, but valleys green. uncommonly fine and awful descent from the road to river. 30 p 5 a pretty church & sycamore L with magnificent views each way, a house R. descend. 40 p 5 + L near the river at bottom. 5 to 6 22d league, 5 p 6 Vill X the river of the valley by a [drawing: arch bridge]. a toll bar. after this a little [drawing: arch bridge] ye stream of which joins the great river of the valley. 25 p 6 arrive. decent Posada of Los Nogales. A small village like a welch town very wet & dirty. The host a great sportsman. His gun made at Ribadeo cost 60 Dollars & was very neat. Sepr 30 quit Los Nogales at 15m to 8 X [drawing: arch bridge] over the stream of the valley 15 p 8 a Glen runs up to L up which 13 intersections of the mountains are seen. Very steep ascent. 30 p 8 23d League. Very steep. chestnuts. 36 a Village called Conco qu? Donco. 15 p 9 a poor Village another valley R the stream of which runs all the way to Villa Franca. 10 p 10 a kind of top but still there is a higher. at 15 to 11 descend. Summer

Margin:
Rained in the night & till the Vill of El Castro on Sep 30, but the road lies on very high Mts

Gell taccuino 6 pag 035

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
LAS NOGALES			Mt near Rasiro

huts or Kalybea’s R. 5 to 11 large Kalybea 20 p 11 Vill & Posada EL CASTRO as Nogales the last Vill of Galicia. Enter the Vierso of Villa Franca. At 12h league Stone 26. 35 p 12 La Hierreria a Village with Iron mines. at 8 p 1 a pretty ruined castle Castillo Zeranina on a hill R.

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
ZERANINA

Gell taccuino 6 pag 036

166
A moorish fort as the people said. 15 p 1 the 27th League Castle still R, at 28 p 1 [Margin: Mts covered with rosemary. Mts covered with Rosemary] Vill & + in which is a collection of skulls. 35 p 1 Vill Ampelia Mesta, where a stream from L under a [drawing: arch bridge] falls in. At 12 to 2 Village 27 p 2 28th League, soon after a thatched Village Tramorero. 20 p 3 pretty Village. 20 to 4 24th 9 League. 15 p 4 Villa Franca, the stream falls under a [drawing: arch bridge] into a great river from L over which a bridge conducts you into the town, Old ugly narrow streets 4 or 5 handsome convents. The Inn or Posada comfortless ruinous very large & prison like with iron grates. The people too not very attentive. [Margin: quit the Mountains] A stranger came into our room praised the English smoaked & spit about – The town looks deserted, so many of the buildings are in runs. Plaister floors

Pen and ink drawing: gate
Entrance of Alhambra
Jurisdiccion de la Real Fortaleza de la Alhambra
Jurisdiccion de la Real Fortaleza de la Alhambra

Gell taccuino 6 pag 037

Pen and ink drawing: view of Villafranca del Bierzo
First sight of Villa Franca

Sheep
October 1st. At 10 to 9 quit Villa franca Delightful valley trees & river R. & Mts with wood & cultivation vineyards. 12 to 10 Village Snow on Mts L 20 miles L. 5 p 10 [drawing: arch bridge] of Cacabelus Vill with olives. 16 p 10 through the Vill, the large houses grated with iron as at V. Franca & many built with large river pebbles as at V.F. Wells [drawing: wells] as in Greece. Climate improves on leaving the mountains. Very like a Thessalian Village. People not so handsome in this Vill as before. 20 p 10 31 Leagues. The river joins the VF river & runs with it into Minho. Very high fine snowy mountain R with many vallies in it Sierra del Castro. 2 Villages at the base

Margin:
[Pen and ink plan: castle] Castle 	Fine warm day
Sheep with beautiful wool & very tame
Sheep fine wool & tame
Gil Blas His tour begins with Cacabelas, El Vierso Astorga &c

Gell taccuino 6 pag 038

164

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
The same from Vill Congoste	Convento de la Peña		congosto

well wooded. 10 to 11 Vill. 7 to 11 Vill & Cypress L. 12 p 11 Vill R. Snowy Mt S del Castro very fine. gravelly country had not rained for some time. 25 p 11 Vill 33 p 11 League 32d, & Vill L. Vill R & do 3 miles R large & wooded La Val de Uras. by which name the plain is called. 20 p 11 Vill L another 1 mile L do 2. 47 p 12 …. Vill good grapes … Val de Urra. 5 to 1 Stone League 33. bank of cistus prickly oak & Arbutus, hot sun climate improves, 8 p 1 fine rapid river runs & X it by a [drawing: arch bridge], Convent of Frayles L on a high rock. A Vill R banks of last river very pretty R. 30 p 2 Vill Congosto Vintage the Convent L above it called de la Peña – 25 p 2 34th League little green pretty valley R, trees & flocks X [drawing: arch bridge]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 039

Pen and ink drawing: street scene
BEMBIBRE

At 10 to 3 in another fine vale at the head of which is Bembibres. 10 p 3 X a [drawing: arch bridge] River runs to R a Village called San Roman. About 10 minutes to Bembibres little town with a castle of mud now ruined. Tower of it entirely composed of unbaked earth proof of the dryness of the climate, even arms remain upon the walls – Good Posada – Many recruits. Very civil – ammunition waggons apparently English – Another coach & 7 came to the Posada.

Margin:
Bill 3 dollars 4 reals
The heads of the oxen very prettily ornamented with skins or fur

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man on mule
A Traveller. Leon.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 040

162
Octob 2d
At 23m p 7 quit Bembibres 35th League. 		Margin: fine warm day
40 p 7 X a [drawing: arch bridge]. 30 p 8 the 36th League.
3 p 9 Village. X a [drawing: arch bridge] & Riv from L runs into that on R both fall into the Sill.
Ascend from the [drawing: arch bridge] & glen. 12 to 10 37th league
Long ascent called El Puerto de Manzanal
3 p 11 38th League continual ascent. 20 p 11 Vill of Manzanales. Regiment of peasants
Margin: 3h 20m to Astorga
5 to 12 top. descend High snowy mountains of Asturias L Octob 2d. Plain of Leon like a sea.
20 p 12 League 39. Stream on R runs SE to Douro.
30 p 1 40th League, Vill Large Lombardo. At 2h Vill L.
5 p 2 X [drawing: arch bridge]. 25 p 2 see Astorga. Ugly parched corn country no trees. 43 p 2 41st League 15 p 3 Astorga.
Large town old X a [drawing: wall] Towers walk on them. Roughstones & mud. Castle called Moorish but with a latin inscription arms a Saint & other Figures. a Cathedral of Gothic appearance with Inigo Jones twisted pillars & [drawing: arch] arches – In the Square there is a building in which two figures in the habits of the Maragotes a people

Gell taccuino 6 pag 041

of this place are made to strike the hours which is esteemed a curiosity. The country very ugly a small river runs in the plain – The people called Maragottes are the most excellent figures for a Sancho or a Hudibras in the world

Pen and ink drawing: building
Maregettas striking the bell 
IN THE SQUARE AT ASTORGA

Astorgas is walled round so as to have only one entrance from the West for carriages. The towers are entirely solid the interior being equally mud & stones.

Margin:
An officer who was taken prisoner at the battle of Rio Seco said the French lost 2000 men that day.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 042

160

Pen and ink drawing: view of Villanueva de Jamuz
Villa Nu Villa Nueva

Quit Astorga 3d of Octob at 8h fine clear warm day a few poplars & a [+ in box] on the S side of it. the road very bad, but being a plain country it is not ncessary to have a better. Stony corn country. At 10h Vill & + L. several ugly farms, about. & + on R. 25 p 10 a Vill & a Vill L. At 11h a fount R. 10 p 11 large Vill & Castle. 1 p 11 X [drawing: arch bridge] clear stream from R. a Vill R. 37 p 11 Vill L, & Vill R. X a [drawing: arch bridge] wooden over a river running to L. Alders & poplars a few English poplars. the bushes of a southern climate not seen here. 10 to 12 Vill L. 5 to 12 Vill La Baneza X [drawing: arch bridge] over a River running R to it a Gate at entry of La Baneza a town of which the M de Miranda is patron. Stop to dine here. the posada very decent, the people of the town & posada both civil, We found here a very good red grape with red juice – Quit La Baneza by a gate of 15m p 2. 35 p 2 Vill L. At 3h Vill R. 10 p 3 Vill L.

Margin: 
Pen and ink drawing: children
Children at Toro

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: priests
Priests
Priests

Gell taccuino 6 pag 043

20 p 3 10 Villages at once seen before us. a [drawing: arch bridge] seen L & X a [drawing: arch bridge] into a Vill the rivulet under which runs from L at 37 p 3. The village called St Juan de Torres. at 45 p 3 R a Vill & Castle called Villa Nueva [drawing: castle] 15 p 4 Vill & Castle & wood & hills R. a Vill L. 37 p 4 Vill R. 15 to 5 Vill L. R Hills. 8 p 5 a Vill. A Vill R X [drawing: arch bridge] a R runs on L with road. Large. 30 p 5 Vill & Convent at foot of hills R. opposite bank of Riv L woods. At 6h Posada. Avisana 7 leagues. a decent inn close to it the bridge over the river Orvigo the centre arch of which spans 24 steps – just across it is a grove of poplars in which the Spanish peasants were collected before the affair of Rio Seco. All the rivers of this plain seem to rise in the Ms N of Leon & S of Asturias. The plain bounded by hills on W but unbounded on E.

Margin:
At La Baneza the French entered after the battle of Rio Seco with 18 men only. General Blake was in the Mountains & the people of the town thought the whole french army was coming.
Similar text in pencil erased

Pen and ink drawings with watercolour: women and child
Lady of Benevente
Peasants at Benevente
Benevente [written over different text in pencil]
Benevente [written over different text in pencil]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 044

158
Pen and ink drawing: arch bridge
Quit PUENTE DE ORBIGO at 5m to 7 Octob 4 [Margin: Fine hot day] X the bridge. Ilex common. 2 p 7 the wood R where the Spanish army halted previous to the affair of Rio Seco ends. A house beyond it. 3 Villages at foot of hills R. 25 p 7 Vill. 37 p 8 large convent & trees L. 10 p 9 Vill R. across the great River Orvigo. A woody country R of that. Road in forest of Ilex. 10 p 10 the town of Benevente surrounded by a mud wall. On E side mud stones. a College & some convents. The streets very wretched the Posada tolerable. The French staid 15 hours in the town & got some money from the College. Quit Benevente at 15m to 1h poor place. 25 p 1 long & dangerous [drawing: arch bridge] because ruined. Large river under it flows to R & joins the Orbigo & Douro &c &c Enter Sandy country, no stones. Toll gate. 5 to 3 Vill L. 25 p 3 distt Vill L. 10 p 4 2 Vills Serazino de los Varios & next Serazin de la Ordin. Cellars cut out of the bank in sand here.

Margin:
Benavente of the Duchess of Ossuna – Her Son Prince of Anglona in Naples. Their Castle very curious & old. The French spoiled it. Armour in the hall old & said to be fine –
Believe the river is the Esla –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 045

Pen and ink drawing: landscape with arch bridge
FROM THE INN AT AVISANA
Pen and ink drawing: cellars
wine cellars in the bank at Serrazin

The soil is so firm that cellars are made at Sarrazino de Ordin merely be excavating. Some of the doors are so handsome that they appear like habitations. Here the carts have real wheels instead of [drawing: wheel]. sandy so that wooden not iron pullies are used Mules are used here in plowing. At 25 p 5 over a very ugly country, arrive at Vilalpondo. 8 leagues Appearance of poverty the mud wall being in ruins. The convent spires only looking well at a distance. The Posada just out of the town. Many Priests. No made road. The drawer of the table where we write at the Inn broken up by the French in hopes of finding money – Rain in the night.

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: woman
Tordesillas

Pencil drawing: arch bridge

Gell taccuino 6 pag 046

156
Octob 5 misty rain abt 6 in the morng. . 6 leagues to M d Toro
Octob 5. At 5 to 6 quit Villalpando bill 3 dollars 6 reals. At 25 p 7 we were told Rio Seco where the French beat Genl Cuesta was 6 leagues L. The maps all wrong in this part 9 or 10 leagues. Plains. 10 p 8 forest of prickly oaks. 30 p 8 X a bad road but the only Xing I remember to have seen in 50 leagues. 8 to 9 X a brook, a town & castle L 5 miles dist. 35 p 9 Vill called Villa de Frayles. Vill R distt. 15 to 10 a castle L seen long before & its Vill. 10 p 10 Vill, Inn & church, a steep bank to another plain, a flat Forest. 10 to 11 quit forest cistus & .. & stone pines. Vill R. The Forest was said to be called Monte de Torolto. 10 to 12 Vill & grove & many little hills [drawing: hills]. Vill is called La Mota del Toro. good Posada. opposite it a large house belonging to a great duke de Hixa. The inn built of earth plaistered & painted below with white & red thus. [drawing: lines] Rather a pretty effect. The French did no mischief here except that a drum major ravished a girl for which the people killed him. A round tower ruined on a hill. Quit the place at 25 p 2 to go 3 leagues to Tordesillas. 30 p 3 Vill R. Vill L. 35 p 3 a Vill called

Gell taccuino 6 pag 047

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: house
HOUSE AT MOTA DE TORO	Duke of Hixa

La Vega de Tronco ugly ploughed country. 37 p 4 Vill. 10 to 5 Vill L. At 5h Vill vines & a wood of stone pines. No stones in the fields, a caravan of wool carts Merino wool. See Tordesillas at 15 p 6 arrive there. The Posada decent the town very wretched looks better at a distance. Not very small. On the SE the Douro runs under the bank, under a [drawing: arch bridge] rather a large river even here. The Plaza small but upon [margin: wine bags] wooden Pillars. Octobr 6 fine day but misty till 9h. Quit Tordesillas at 15 to 9 Xing [drawing: arch bridge] 15 to 11 the town of Rueda good brick churches & convents & houses. The bricks in Spain all like Roman.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 048

154
time of the vintage. People very civil everywhere offered us grapes. Sandy flat. vineyards everywhere At 10m p 12h see the Castillian Mts. 4 p 1 arrive at town of Medina del Campo fount large Town houses on wooden pillars. a river nearly dry many brick +s & [+ in box]s. A very large rather handsome Plaza. Ruined castle at NE end of City. SE of the town the Alcazar fine in point of size, a kind of barrack. 5 p 2 sand & Italian pines. Tilled carts here with 5 mules. 7 p 3 vill L. 8 p 3 X [drawing: arch bridge] the rivulet runs L. The mode of sowing wheat is to throw it on the ground & then plough it in
Meet a coach & 7. Wine cellars. 30 p 3 Vill San. Vicente.. 30 p 4 Taquinas where sleep. A large Village houses very neat, of mud all on one floor. good brick +. people asked us to eat as we walked by the door & the boys were playing at ploughing & at Soldiers.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 049

Pen and ink drawing: view of Orbita
Specimen of Villages on the plains of Leon	ORVITA	& old Castile.

Octob 7. a fine hot day quit Taquines Aloquines at 7h. 20 p 8 Vill R. At 9h Pines. 10 p 9 Vill R. 10 to 10 Arevalos town with towers ruined castle. X a glen to it [drawing: arch bridge] walls 2 towers Another [drawing: arch bridge] over a glen 17 p 10 stream Runs to L but turns & runs under +. An inscriptn of Carlos IIII. 10 to 11 Vill L. Pine forests R & L. 25 p 11 Vill, meet a Calesh. 40 p 11 Vill Orbita where dine, bill for 4 persons less than a dollar. 15 p 2 quit Orbita 35 p 3 Vill. flocks of Bustards like geese. 33 p 3 Vill Araniero. Vultures black in the fields. 40 p 4 large Vill San Cyrian. Road made & a stone 15 leagues to Madrid. A small vill called Almorza at 10 p 5. Road to Salamanca turns off here R. Real Port Asego. descend into a better & roughly wooded plain. 15 p 5 X [drawing: arch bridge] River runs L. Qu a chase. 5 to 6 ascending. 14 league stone. 7 p 6 8 crosses La cruce cruz del Calvario 8 p 6 Vill.. Alabaxos Lavajos Bill not 3 dollars
Quit Alabaxos where a decent Posada Oct 8, at 6h. a fine day but colder as we ascended. High Bushy plain. 4 to 7 League 14. 8h Vill Villa Castin.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 050

152
Granite. 11 p 8 League 12. Rocks of granite like Cyclopian walls R & L ascend, enter the Sierra 36 p 8 stony glen Xd by [drawing: arch bridge] brook to L. Cardenia Riv At 9h a stone but not a league Paso del Monte shrubs & rocks. 25 p 9 11th League Las Navas del Rey qu Sn Antonio large Village, meet a coach & 6. steep hill. pass of Guaderama. 10 p 10 meet 3 coaches & 6 NB larger coaches & very like ours. 15 p 10 house on a top, descend, to a Mtain valley. 40 p 10 [+ in box] El Christo en colloquio de calloco. 40 p 10 10th League a brook runs L. A Vill R El Espinal large, at 5 p 11 – At 12h 9th League & Vill Fonda de San Rafael stop to dine, a good, house. a fount. Mts covered seen in View with scotch firs & pinastres. a +. Segovia road turns off here. ascend steep winding road among pines wild & often beautiful several sorts of thyme. well watered. The Puerto or pass of Guaderama. On the top after a very long ascent a pedestal of Stone Fer VI. a lion at top of granite done when he had finished the roads. On the top see as far as the plains of Leon one way & to Madrid 8 leagues & as much beyond, the other. Distinguish at Madrid the casa del China. L at bottom a Vill & gardens.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 051

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: view of Escorial
ESCURIAL
4 stories & 1 in roof 52 windows 18 ft dist by 31
E front 240 steps long. 52 windows abt 18 ft dist by 31 windows

The court seem to have quitted it entirely as it is much neglected but the monks say the Royal Family resided there 3 months in the year.
Escurial length 600 feet

25 p 10 Escurial Octob 9. descend. 35 p 10 the mean Vill of Baxo Escurial. 6 leagues ½ to Madrid. 11h 6 leagues. 15 to 12 pass [drawing: arch bridge] & gates of demesne. very hot. 10 p 12 5 leagues. + R. 18 p 12 Galapagas Vill & [drawing?] R is the Posta del Rey a post house. join the Guaderama road. 17 to 2 X [drawing: arch bridge] stream runs to R. ugly country 10 p 2 3 Leagues to Madrid. 20 to 3 2 leagues & ½ Vill L La Rota & a Vill R. 3 to 3 a bad road from L joins. see Madrid plainly. 10 p 3 2 leagues. Woody country L. bare near the road. A Royal chase L. Arbaca? R at 10 to 4. Turn R quitting the greatest road. A fount Fuente del Rey at 4h. 20 p 4 enter an enclosure by gate. gardens L. R [drawing: hills] where the french had batteries &c 15 to 5 pass 2d barrier. ½ league. A toll. X River Manzanares. Poplars & gardens, water 6 inches deep bed sandy but broad. reenter great road elms & poplars. Foot path, meet a carriage & 2 mules. meet a 2d at 5h. pretty spouting fountain & walks enter gate under an angle of the palace. give a dollar to the custom house officer. Puerta St Vicente very handsome only ornamental. Palace very

Margin:
Pencil drawing: map
Pencil drawing: fountain?
at Madrid Oct 10 Thermom = 62 & varying from 62 to 66 till Octob 24, when a very hot day, too hot except in the wind.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 052

148
handsome but upon a very high basement of 3 or 4 stories the rest beautiful. drive to the Cruz de Malta a pretty good but dear Fonda where we staid 2 days & then took a lodging. Italian opera very good Sra Marchesini & Sa Fineschi the singers & two very good men. Opera a ridicule of Gli Orazii e Curiazii. the after piece Filandro e Carolina. On the morning of the tenth Oct 1808 a bull feast Corrida de los Toros 6 bulls killed 4 or 5 poor horses cruelly gored to death. In the afternoon 8 bulls & many horses besides a man fell. The amphitheatre is at least 100 yards in diamr & the seats have 15 rows besides 7 in the boxes behind & the upper story where the private boxes are hung with silk of all colours. It is exactly except in being a circle on the plan of a roman amphitheatre. The palace full of fine pictures – A court in the middle – Our Lodging cost a dollar a day. 2 bad bed rooms, a good sitting
Pen and ink drawing: bull-ring
Section of the Colliseo de los Toros
room, a bad dining room, servants rooms & kitchen. Cloth & every thing which requires labour very dear. The people we knew. The Condesa Altemira

Margin:
Thermometer from 62 to 66 from 10th to 20 of October

Bill for us & Servants at [drawing: Maltese cross] 18 dollars & ½. 2 dinners. 2 nights. 2 breakfasts for each. 4 rooms.

The language of Madrid seems very impure. Infantado is always pronounced Infantao. Valladolid Vaioi &c

Eating for 2 & 3 servants for a fortnight cost 105 dollars


Gell taccuino 6 pag 053

Music by Señor Sor.
THE BATTLE OF BAYLEN.			DUO

[Music]
Words: Venid Vencedores Coronas de Onor la Patria es el premio de tanto Valor Tomad los laureles que habeis merecido los que os han rendido Moncey y Dupont Vosotros que fieles habeis acudido al primer gemido di nuestra opresion. Venid

Venid Vencidores
De la Patria honor
La Patria os de el premio
De tanto valor –
Tomad los laureles
Que habeis merecido
Los que os han rendido
Moncey y Dupont
Vosotros que fieles
Habeis acudido
Al primer gemido
De nuestra opresion
		Venid &c
Venganza llamaba
De sangre inocente
Alzasteis la frente
Que jamas temiò
Y al veros los dueños
De tantas conquistas
Huyen como aristas
Que el viento arrollò
		Venid &.
Vos de una mirada
Que echasteis al cielo
Parasteis el vuelo
Del Aguila audaz
Y al polvo arrojasteis
Con iras bizarras
Las alas y garras
Del ave rapaz. Venid &.
X Llegad ya Provincias
Que valeis naciones
Ya vuestros pendones
Deslumbran al Sol.
Palido el Tiranno
Tiembla, y sus legiones
Muerden los terrones
Del suelo español.
		V…
Son à vuestras plantas
Alfombra serena
Laureles de Jena
Palmas de Austerliz:
Son cantos de Gloria
Volver los cantivos
Sus gritos altivos
El llanto infeliz. V…
X O que hermosos vienen
Su porte quan fiero
Qual suena el acero
Qual brilla el arnes.
Estos son guerreros
Valientes y bravos
Y no los esclavos
Del yugo frances. V..
X Gloria, o flor del Betis
Que habeis bien probado
El brio heredado
Del suelo natal
Que alli sin cultivo
Cresce y se levanta
Del triunfo la planta
La Oliva inmortal.
X Funesto es el dia
Frances orgulloso
Y el campo ominoso
Que pisas, tambien
La sombra de Alfonso
Con iras mas bravas
Su Gloria en las Navas
Defiende en Baylen.
Salve honor del Turia
De Marte centellas
Pues vivos como ellas
Al triunfo volais,
La hueste enemiga
Rompeis imprevistos
Y apenas sois vistos
Victoria cantais.
X Gloria o valerosos
Del solar Manchego
O quan bello riego
Dais à vuestra mies
Los surcos se vuelven
Sepulcro a tiranos
Sangrientes los granos
Se mecen despues.
X Y tanto en el Ebro
Los pechos son muros
Que atienden seguros
Morir o vencer
Siempre el sol los halla
Lidiando con Gloria
Siempre con Victoria
Los dexa al caer.
O quien claros veo
Brillar en sus ojos
Los fieros enojos
Que van a vengar
O quanto trofeo
Que ganò su espada
Verà consolada
La Patria en su altar.
O Patria respira
De males prolixos
Descansa en los hijos
Que al cielo te dio.
Ni temas que el arte
Falte a su fortuna
Soldados la cuna
Naciendo los vio.
X Ya vengada solo
Libertad y Gloria
Dexara en memoria
Tu agravio en Madrid
Tiempo es ya que altiva
La frente levantes
Pues llegan triunfantes
Los hijos del Cid.
X Palafox. que Orfeo
Dira tu constancia
Si eclipsa a Numantia
Tu heroico teson
Que cisne o Câstaños.
Tu honor cantaria
Si el triunfo en Pavia
Se humilla a tu accion.
Ninfas vengan lauros
Frescos verdes bellos
Enjugad con ellos
Tan noble sudor
Ni olvideis la oliva
Que es planta gloriosa
Ni aun alguna rosa
Que os brinde amor.


Gell taccuino 6 pag 054

144
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Hill & Church of Sta Maria de los Angeles.

Quit Madrid at 9h Octob 24 very fine hot & clear to bridge of Toledo over the Manzanares, very fine strike off from it. Turn L. 38 p 9 Toll. At 10h a [drawing: hill] hill X the river L. At 15 p 10 a road turns R to Villaverde & beyond it a Vill & palace of the Duca de Infantado. A Vill left under [drawing: hill]. At 11h Getafe large vill R & the hill & + of La Vergine de los Angeles L. 25 p 11 2d league. Post house Angeles Olives scattered & vines. 15 p 12 Vill R Pinto. 32 p 12 League 3d. 20 p 1 Val de Moro, General Cuesta has a house there. large Vill or Town. 40 p 1 4th League. 15 p 2 League 4 ½. Post house Olives – 15 to 3 league 5. 15 p 3 at bottom of the hill & in the vale of Mancanares, having seen the vale of the Tagus from the top. on each side the road, rows double, of Trees. League 6. turn L. 35 p 3 X a great bridge over Manzanares, vale about 2 miles wide. Deer Trees of Royal Demesne begin. Very long avenue turning again R from the bridge. 20 p 4 L is an aquaduct & a wheel of 30 feet diam~ which throws up the water for the grounds. Enter thicker woods. 34 p 4 league 6 ½. 15 p 5. cascade of the Tagus a white muddy river and the palace. Gardens very shady. The town of Aranjuez very regularly laid out. wide streets. rows of trees in them – A large Inn full of people & Carriages. We met many on the road from Madrid.

Margin:
King Wamba of pueblo de Bamba. his body translated from a + he built there to Toledo. King Recesvinto built at at Pisnerga in 610 as an inscriptn yet says on a stone.
Wamba in 674 built walls & Towers round Toledo. with stones from Circus maximus &c.
Erexit fautore Deo rex inclytus urbem Wamba &c.
Bridge of Alcantara at Toledo impassable in time of Ervigio successor of Wamba. This King sent a Duke or Governor Sala to repair it. Verses of Eugenius 3 archbishop confirm this.
Gothic monuments of Spain. D Juan Cean Bermudez
Arabs in 713 came & copied from Egypt pointed arches. pretence of media luna for arcos de herradura.
Friezes called Almocarabes o ajaracas.
frisos enriquecidos con lazos cintos plantas y letras floreadas. Con moldes y yeso.
Tarbeas high & great salones.
Alfagias o patios. en vez de grades tenien ranques.
Alhamias = dormitories. Alcoves in walls.

Kings Dairy very fine in the way.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 055

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Palace on the Tajus between Aranjuez &
TOLEDO

At Aranjues the houses almost all of one story and very regularly built with very wide streets. Plaistered with a coat of mud, next mortar & then paint. the streets & squares generally right angles. The whole is surrounded with wood & delightful avenues which extend eight or 10 miles in length up & down the Tajo, and 3 or 4 in the opposite direction. The palace is very like all the other palaces of Spain. Great staircases of stone, balls pyramids, obeliscs, &c.... The Tagus is cut into 2 streams or runs so naturally as to leave an island for a private garden which is shady & pretty. The Casa de Labrador or gardeners house a folly of King Carlos IV is about a mile distant from the town up the Tajo. the outside is ugly but like everything at Aranjuez surrounded by trees. A moat is made round it with a wooden bridge. Urns of marble &c. The inside is painted & ornamented very prettily. In some parts no expense has been spared. One small room has pilasters covered with arabesques uncommonly well executed in solid gold & Plateria. Every thing is well finished, & the best specimens of Valencia silk & cloth of Gold are seen on almost every wall. The floors are not all good, some indeed of inlaid marble & some of Tiles glazed & prettily painted but many are of brick & of the common kind not baked sufficiently or of bad materials which fill all Spanish rooms with red dust – The imitation of marble in Scagliola is here in the 

Margin:
Great No of Arabic M.S.S. at Kgs Library shewing that there was a great College of Physicians at Toledo –
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: woman on mule with man
Pen and ink plan with watercolour: interior
We dined at Sir Chas Stuarts at Aranjuez with Ld. Wm. Bentinck. Ld Walpole & Sr Thos Graham. The last was getting supplies for Sr John Moors Army the others amusing themselves.
Arsenal. Casa de los Marineros, cannon. frigates. real Sailors. sham fights. Kings boat very fine.
Court comes here in April & in dog days goes to La Granja St Ildefonso thence to the Escurial & in Novr to Madrid. & Prado

Gell taccuino 6 pag 056

142
Pen and ink drawing: view of Toledo
Alcazar	Cervantes	Tajo River	TOLEDO	approach from Aranjuez
Pen and ink drawing: cathedral

highest perfection, even white marble & so well done as to appear fully equal to the rest. The Tajo joins the Jarama & the Mançanares near Aranjuez. Near the casa del Labrador the King has built several ships of the line & frigates on the river. In miniature. In these ships he took great delight & went often on board. There is a theatre in the hall of the pit & boxes is square & the actors were most wretched – The weather beautiful & so hot as to scorch the skin of the face
Octob 26 fine day but a fog in the morning quit palace of Aranjuez at 15 to 9 – Road in an avenue. 35 p 9 a Casa de Campo like a monastery on the bank, planted wih olives, near on L. Puerto de Flaminges. ¾ of a league. Tamarisks in forests. Fine pastures on which the royal horses &c. grazed. A second casa del Campo R. 8 leagues from Madrid. About a league from Aranjuez the Royal avenues cease. 10 to 10 X a river, on R across the Tajus on a bank high is the Village of Anoure del Tajo. 10 p 12 Villa Mejor two large houses, an Inn the made road ceases. 15 p 1 X [drawing: arch bridge] over a stream running R. 20 to 2 X [drawing: arch bridge]. Plain covered with Liquorice. 20 p 2 X [drawing: arch bridge]. 20 to 5 Toledo, All the way is an uncultivated heath or Thyme common. R the bed of the Tajo is always marked by trees. miles of Tamarisks. Entering Toledo is a ruined castellated garden house. some pretty Fountains. A fine Statue of King Wamba Kg of the Goths. The entrance to the city a fine [drawing: arch bridge] over the Tajo very rocky deep bed very picturesque. steep ascent to

Margin:
Cathedral of Toledo
gallery of Kings
As much as I could sketch before the Archbishop entered
Specimen of Spanish wit instead of D-n Pitt. Wm Wilkins is a fool &c –
En una secreta
“Aqui cago Dn Josef Guttierrez
“dia 1mo de Junio 1792”.
Not content with this the author proceeds with his title “Empleado en les Reales salines de Pinilla en La Mancha.
Don Vicente Gomiel de Daymel follows his example. –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 057

Toledo capital of Carpetania. Here was the table of the shew bread taken from the Temple of Solomon. Hyacinths & emeralds. Taric took it.
Toledo taken by Xtians 1085. In 17 century 200 000 souls, now 20 000.
Alonzo el Sabio & Carlos V here.
There is a Fonda del Arzobispo.
Adam first King of Spain of which Toledo the Capital. Tradition.
the market place, where the houses have a very grotesque appearance 5 or 6 stories of wooden galleries – The Cathedral is a most magnificent gothic edifice, about 450 feet long, the central Aisle abt 14 yards wide the pillars 5 yds. the side Aisles 7 the pillars again 5 & the next aisle about 7 more. The windows are richly stained.
The Archbishops Palace is joined to the cathedral by an arch thrown over the street.
In the cathedral a compleat dress for the holy image of gold cloth of which very little is seen being covered with pearls and every kind of precious stone, the riches of the church are immense in silver diamonds gold rubies amethysts emeralds &ccccc. The clock has a curious method of construction for the palates which seems very good & the clock itself is of beautiful workmanship. The gothic work of the shrines in silver & painted wood the great altar the carving of the wars of Granada on the stalls in the choir 3 organs gold cups &cccc are well worth seeing. In the sacristy pictures. The church is said to be of the 12th century, but not that now standing. On the church of St Francis built by Ferdinand & Isabella after the conquest of Granada are the fetters of the Christians the King found or pretended to find imprisoned at Granada. The Palace of that Most catholic monarch joined the church and was a very moderate edifice. The palace of Rodrigo.

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: gate
walls.
Moorish Gate & walls Toledo
Built before 1085 when the Xtians retook it.
Pen and ink plan: interior
[Arabic]
Tolaitola, in Arab M.S.S.
Petticoats of Peasants turned up with rose leaves flowers & stripes used as veils.
Of the Castillo de Cervantes. the romance says
“Castillo de san Cervantes
“Tu que estas par de Toledo
“Cercote el Rey don Alfonzo
“Sobre las aguas de Tejo”. &c &c
Pen and ink drawing: cogs clock at Toledo
A little oratory remains at Toledo built by the Moors of still older Roman materials before 1085.
Pen and ink drawings with watercolour: woman and man
Peasant Toledo
After Swilla it became Gothic capital
It had 150 Towers to landside 1083
Moors took it 714. Alphonso VI in May 1085.
He styled himself Emperor Magnif of Toledo.
Cid Governor in 1089 built Castle of San Cervantes. Title Imperial.
LETRILLA
“Buena orina y buen color”
“Y dos higas al Doctor.”
The Alcasar is 80 Toises
6
480 feet above Tagus.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 058

140
VENTA DE SANT ANA NEAR TOLEDO
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: landscape with building
Moorish
last King of the Goths is now a convent near Sn Francis. The college is a beautiful Ionic building, the court entered & surrounded by very handsome Ionic columns of Granite. The Church & college of the ex Jesuits is also handsome. The Alcasar or Palace is now a kind of barrack, on the highest point in the city a magnificent edifice on the site of the Moorish palace built by the Emperor Charles V as the Eagle over the door seems to indicate. It is very handsome within as far as the courts staircase. A fine gallery overlooks the deep glen of the Tagus. The Market place is called Socodover. There are two bridges over the Tagus one from Aranjuez & one towd the South both handsome & picturesque. out of the Gate towd N W is the church & tomb of Santa Leocadia very ancient, has been converted into a mosque & back again is of the earliest style. Council of Toledo held here. Little Brick arches. one of Sn Vincent in the town of the same architecture. The sword factory a square palace about ½ mile NW of the city, the trial of them is not so severe as in England [drawing: sword] They are begun by a piece of iron between two pieces of steel proportion 12 to 23. The work does not go on very briskly but the few workmen clever. Visited his Eminence the Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo & Seville Metropolitan of Spain Nephew of the King & aged 28.

Margin:
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Toledo
SITE OF TOLEDO
There is in the Cathedral of Toledo a little bit of Moorish frieze. But it may be Mozarabic Xtian ie not Moorish.
Mozarabic Chapel.
[drawing: building]
Ao 1226 foundation of Cathedral of Toledo by architect Cavez.
the market place called Socodover has windows like opera boxes for the people to see tournaments & shews as it was formerly.
circus Roman
circus Roman

Gell taccuino 6 pag 059

Pen and ink drawing with coffee: street scene
TOLEDO
with Coffee

Gell taccuino 6 pag 060

138
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Almonacid	Castle of Almonacid

Either by nature or education he seemed very humble, quiet & inoffensive, as well as rather unused to strangers. His sister the Princess of the peace was in the house with him after she fled from the mob & her husband who used her ill. The palace is by no means fine. He had the nose of the family and did not seem very lively – The canonico Don Diego de las Torres y Arze of the Order of St. Yago was very obliging & took us to all the curiosities of the city. The streets are narrow & the houses high but the town has a very interesting appearance – Saw one Arabic inscriptn. much ruined on a pillar of marble. The town contains more than 20 000 souls. Below it on the banks of the Tajo are gardens & country houses. once 200 000.
Now at Toledo 100 religious estab’. 600 persons connected with the Cathedral. Archbishops rent before revolution 600 000 dollars. now 200 000. in 6th. Century a + here, it became a mosque, then a + though guarrantyd to Moors Alfonso had given his word but the Queen contrived it when he was absent. The Moors alarmed sent an Alfoqin to meet him on his return in fury as it remained a Church. In Cathedral tombs of many Kings – Moorish Shepherd who guided Alfonso VIII through Sierra Morena to Las Navas de Tolosa. Painting of Jews crucifying a boy. the Quemadero the consequence. Alcazar now existing built by Alfonso X. Church of San Juan de los Reyes has the chains, some say taken from Xtians at taking of Granada? Ferdinand & Isabella.
Abu Abdallah Ben Said Mohamad ben Said chief Judge of Toledo wrote Encyclopaedia of all Sciences.

Margin:
[Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man] The Archbishop Himself
[Pen and ink drawing: man] Castille
Bill at the Fonda sleeping 2 nights & taking 2 dinners & 2 breakfasts 12 dollars

Gell taccuino 6 pag 061

TOLEDO TO VAL DE PEÑAS
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Toledo to Valdepeñas
Helvas was [Arabic] Albasch.
[Arabic] Hosnalzahr or Peñaflor
[Arabic] Calathhamad or Alamedilla
[Arabic] FahSalballuth or Llano de la Bellotas
[Arabic] proelium Acab or of Las Navas

Gell taccuino 6 pag 062

136
Pen and ink drawing: landscape with two buildings
Nuestra Señora de Consolacion		Venta de Avertura.

Quit Toledo Octob 28 fine day at 9h. pass [drawing: arch bridge] & ascend behind the Moorish castle of Cervantes very steep ascent. On top a moorish building now called St Ana. Venta. has a well & moorish door & garden & olives. The air scented with very aromatic Thyme. Little cultivation. 30 p 10 Vill ½ league R hill 1 league R. some cultivation. Olives. 35 p 10 Venta Blanca. one house. L & R trees ½ mile distn. 5 p 12 pass between 2 hills, town & castle of Almonacid ruined castle L 8 miles. 17 to 2 Villa aminaya probably Amin aga name of the Moor who built it. Houses round courts & wells as in greece. On one an inscriptn AMA A DIOS SOBRE TODAS LA COSAS. it is a ruinous place. enter a dry country the people call all this side of the Tajo La Mancha. A road L to Mora Town & ruined castle on a hill. 5 to 4 Vill & ruined castle with arms of Castile but Turkish battlements [drawing: crenellations] or [drawing: crenellations] called MANZANIQUE. poor village very poor Inn the Alcayde a very poor man & the curate came to learn the news & offer what they could – The room had no windows bill for 2 & 2 servants 4 dollars & 3 shillings
Octob 29 quit Manzanique at ¼ p 9h delightful day. At 10h + R & house L of Filistera large old +. a fount at it which seems the reason of building it. 15 p 10 X the river running from it. 10 to 1 Las Carboneras a few houses & well some Valencians & Murcians exactly in the common Greek dress. Some people of La Mancha with leathern doublets & the rest brown looking exactly like a rusty suit of armour. At 2h = to Consuegra town & [drawing: castle] moorish castle R. 5 p 3 fields of Saffron, blue flowers & enter Madridejos

Margin:
Ezzeddin Abdelaziz Ebn Abilcassem Babasri in the Library at Granada writes of Samarkand [Arabic] thus or rather Amet Ben Vadeh
Lofty Samarcand deserves to be called the glory of Chorasan. the paradise of regions. Are not its towers hung so high that they elude the sight. Like the moon in a grove of trees shady. Like the full moon its rivers are the milky way & its citadels shine like Stars.
Its walls also says Hassan Ben Almonder are like the sun for roundness.

Gothic church of los Reyes Nuevos next after Cathedral. Many little churches built for mosques remain little altered
The Alhajas or robes of great ceremony in the cathedral invaluable.
summer hot at Toledo winter mild.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 063

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: church
church at Madridejos

Madridejos a large mud village with a large old church not built in the form of a cross, more like some mosques but that the top has arches like the churches of Constantine.
The Bill here was 6 dollars of which waiting & beds came to 3. The Inn was kept by Gipsies. The woman who waited at dinner launched out in praise of English handkerchiefs. I got up to give one to her which was placed in the top of a trunk. She had already stolen it which produced that eulogium on the manufacture. She was going to carry off my night shirt when she had made my bed & in the morning my servant set down my shoes while the barber shaved him. The Barber managed to keep the razor at his throat while his wife stole the shoes. The servant saw her, knocked the barbers hand away & caught the woman putting the shoes into another womans pocket. The hat of one of the coachmen was also stolen –
Octob 30 fine day hot 15 to 9 quit Madridejos pass a + & [drawing: arch bridge]. Abt 1 mile out is a + of wood, the stones of an anathema & aqui murio por Violencia .… a murder. A few houses L. 15 p 11 Venta de Lapiche hills begin. Olives bear well. 15 to 12 Vill & pass a mile wide La Puerta de Lapiche. Don Quixote. see 40 miles of plain & the tops of a Sierra. At 10 to 2 X causey reeds & river running into Guadiana Villaherta. mud village poor inn.

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man
Boy of Mengibar

Gell taccuino 6 pag 064

134
Pen and ink drawing: courtyard
Court & Corrida de los Toros at Church of Nra Sra de Consolacion
a very great want of consolation throughout.

Octob 31 fine but cold & white frost till about 9h. 15 to 9 quit Villaharta, small place. a plain without end. sometimes uncultivated some: part of it bushy, had been woody. At 18h Casa nueva del Rey, Post house, single house, thought unsafe to sleep at because single. Many soldiers on road. country very uninhabited from Madridejos. Qu? is this the Venta de Quesada. The Guadiana here runs underground 7 Leagues. ploughed country. The curve of the earth plainly perceptible here, first the church & then the houses of Manzanares seen. 25 to 1 a castle qu Alhambra [drawing: castle] seen L distant. 30 p 1 Mancanares town large mud walled said to be the best town in the country. The people ugly. Saffron blue flower &c .. A couple of mules & 2 men drew two ploughs here. soon after see another country descending very little to Nuestra Señora de La Consolacion where arrive at 5 to 4. The place called Venta de l’ Avertura, consists of one miserable Venta & the + joined to a corrida de los Toros & an Anchorites cell. Eremita. No other houses near. A well Alarm of thieves being a single house. No appearance of any real danger but forced to watch during the greater part of the night –

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing: ploughing
Making 2 furrows
Pen and ink drawing: well well
Venta of Averturas
Pen and ink plan: interior

Gell taccuino 6 pag 065

PASS OF THE SIERRA MORENA
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Pass of the Sierra Morena

Gell taccuino 6 pag 066

132
Pen and ink drawing: view of Santa Cruz de Mudela
Santa Cruz de Mudela

Novr 1st a cold rainy morning but not perpetual rain, quit Nuestra Señora de Consolacion at 20 to 9. the pass at N.S. 4 miles wide. 25 p 10 olives vines & small hills. 20 p 11 Val de Peñas famous for wine large ranch Vill. 5 to 1 X [drawing: arch bridge]. 15 to 2 2 Villages L dist.t 30 p 2 Santa Cruz de Mudela large Village. church picturesque. 20 p 4 a + & Venta dreary hills. 20 to 6 Visillo village & large inn. great stables. Bill about 5 Dollars. Visillo N side of the Sierra Morena Novemr 2 A rainy cold morning quit at 5m to 9. descend 20 to 10 X a [drawing: arch bridge] stream runs S. 32 p 10 X [drawing: arch bridge] over the glen in which descend enter the Sierra. 30 p 11 Venta de Cardenia single house said to be a good inn [pen and ink drawing: bridge] X the [drawing: arch bridge] soon after more houses or another inn. picturesque descent. Mountains seem higher as road descends & more abrupt. plenty of trees. 20 p 2 the pass tremendous trees & rocks. A place where the French lost many men. 15 to 1 more open modern ruined aquaduct. Casa or Puerta del Rey. 12 p 1 X [drawing: arch bridge] whence leaving the glen of the river ascend much till 15 p 2 Village of St Ellena on a high top. Small Vill, soon after a + & more houses L. fields & scattered [drawing: tree]s on top. Arbutus. Andrachne &c. 15 p 3 Venta Nueva whence a fine view over the valleys at the foot of the Sierra & beyond the vale of the Guadalquivir the high Sierra Nevada of Granada. Hence descend. Wild pears or Gall trees people were said to make ink of the fruit. 4h a Village

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man
Bearded Priest with a Moorish face at the ferry of the Guadalquivir Nov 3d. 1808.
section of road over the Sierra Morena
Pen and ink drawing: road
The common idea of the defence afforded by the Sierra Morena to Andalusia by the road is very strong but the mountain is passable in almost every part.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 067

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
PASS OF SIERRA MORENA
Dispeñaperros – Pitch of Dogs – made by Charles III – Le Meur french engineer

Las Navas de Tolosa, with its ruined castle a mile R. Aloe hedges. In the village this inscriptn on a cross. EL TRIUNFO DE LA SANTA CRUZ EN MEMORIA DE LA BATALLA QUI SE DIO EN ESTE SITO DE LAS NAVAS DE TOLOSA EL AÑO DE 1212.
Hence a plain cultivated country to La Carolina a German colony placed there

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
CASTLE OF TOLOSA		SIERRA MORENA
[Arabic]
why called by Moors El Korb

by Carlos III consisting of a long street in the centre of which is a Hexagon 40 p 4. The town full of troops & the people really unconcerned as at a German Inn. Pretty fount & avenues of trees. Mulberries for Silk worms, & olives close to the town. Quit Carolina ½ p 5. many people of the Sierra speak German. Established 30 years as some of the people said. a country covered with vines & olives with aloe hedges pass a square village & through two of this shape [drawing: plan] & at 25 p 8 reach Guaroman 2 leagues from Carolina where a large inn. pretty good, people civil. infinitely warmer than on the other side the sierra though it often rained, On the whole the Sierra by no means a precipitous mt. Might be passed by infantry without touching the great road, where the pass is very dangerous.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 068

130
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Venta Nueva on the top of the Sierra Morena.
Venta Nueva St Elena

37 p 9 Nov 3d quit Guarroman, rainy day but not perpetual, nor cold. Guarroman a small place. X [drawing: arch bridge] & turn L from main road beautiful woody country. Enter a very delightful glen full of trees & Rocks. Evergreen oaks & acorns good to eat 1 inch ½ long.

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Baeza.		coming down S.side of Sierra Morena	Mt of Jaen

20 p 10 recross river, mastic & oleander bushes. Asphodels white 9 feet high. Geranion Lavender a greek thyme. holy holly – Pass through this lovely valley till 12h when a few huts. Battle of Baylen. 30 p 12 X [drawing: arch bridge] de Linares. in plain House R Village JARALQUINTO a league L on a hill with a castle which the French before the battle of Baylen had when driven from the ferry of Menjibar by the forces from Jaen 15 to 1 X a road. to Jaralquinto. 10 to 2 inn & well. name like Merigivo Bones of the french. Woods in the plain very large, a road comes in from R. 40 p 2 at top of a hill ruined castle R. Gen’ Reding

Pen and ink drawing: view of Mengíbar
GUADALQUIVIR & MENGIBAR FROM ye FERRY.	Here the french were beaten previous to the battle of Baylen


Gell taccuino 6 pag 069

Pen and ink map with watercolour: Mengíbar
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Bailén

in fact conqueror of Baylen. Castaños’s plan of attack was for the day after, when Wedel would have arrived. See Mengibar across Guadalquivir & vale. descend to plain a river. bare corn fields. 10 p 3 ferry boat. the Village about a mile off Capers & the flowers of the Cephisus blue. Olives turning brown Novr Aloes. 30 p 4 uphill to the Village. We were met by a kind of Don Quixote who was very (because we called him Don Quixote) civil & shewed us two inscriptions. The town has an old tower, one church 300 houses & sent 80 men to the army for the Kingdom of Jaen. 4 leagues from Guarroman. Perhaps Mentesa of the Romans.
Hence
Elmanzor, khasara Tablahu fi Calcanasser
?
Was it here that a Moor saw a Spectre on the banks of the Guadalquivir which said “Almanzor has lost his drum at __? I forget the names? Where is this story.
Drum at Kalkanasor. Vid p 40.
543 Vol 1 Conde Kalat Anosor
Moorish Atalayas or watch Towers

Margin:
[Arabic]
Proelium Acab or la batalla de las Navas
[Arabic]
Bridge of Alcantara at Toledo built by Halaf son of Mahomed Alameri Alcaide of Toledo by order of Almanzor Aboamir Mahomat son of Abihamir alguacil of Amir Almomenin Hixem 387 years before it was repaired by D. Alfonso son of D Ferrando & of Queen Donna Beatriz of Castilla 1258.

INSCRIPTION in latin on a house wall in Mengibar
D.M.S.
SEPTIMUS SEPTIMI
…………………………….
[Symbols] ET [symbol] ADVENTA
BENE MERENS SUIS
Cork Hives here
Gell taccuino 6 pag 070

128
Pen and ink drawing: view of Mengíbar
Mt of Jaen.		Mengibar		Ford of Guadalquivir or Betis

Novr 4 no rain, fine warm day. quit Mengibar at 30 p 8. 5 p 9 X [drawing: arch bridge]. 3 to 10 casa del Campo Infantas. 4 miles L X the river see Almenhara Vill. 20 p 10 R close Mansana casa de campo. 30 p 10 Casa Blanca 3 houses L by river. X a rivulet. 10 p 11 very fine view of Mt & castle of Jaen, over another hill. river of Jaen very pretty here a castle across it. 25 to 12 X rivulet convent L Grangeña near. stop to draw. X a very fine rivulet 2 miles from Jaen. X 2 more after. Olives & 5 casa de campos in them L. nearer very picturesque town & castle. Trees & woods of mulberries from the base of the town over which see the houses. Arrive at 10 p 2 4 leagues from Mengibar after stopping half an hour. Very singular town bishopric, old Houses with galleries in the Moorish taste at top. Priests much too kind. Officer took us to the Duca de Monte Mar & a Tertullia.
The whole town waited upon us so as to be very troublesome and we have great dificulty to prevent them from paying our bill at the worst Inn in the world. Jaen 20,000 inhabitants, few or no Moorish remains but their style is visible in the buildings. Visited by 5 inundations of Priests, Officers, & Peasants. The priests left the services in the cathedral to shew us the place. The cathedal fine in its way being
over door of mosque Cordova “o true believers come not to prayers when ye are drunk.”

Margin:
Andujar next stage. pretty place.
cross river there fine meadows. Rich.
Cordova = Colonia Patriciae. Seneca & Lucan
Pen and ink drawing: gate
Cordova gate
The Campiña or plain
Cordova on R bank of Guadalquivir Abderahman last of Omeyan dynasty 755. His great garden of Azarak. moedinos shepherds unde merinos. Cordova then 600 mosques, 50 hospitals 80 schools, 900 public baths.
Seville had 400 000 souls, Cordova had they pretend a million. Granada 400 000. now Cordova 54000. Palmtrees. Mosque with Caaba & the Alaska of Jerusalem famous. had 39 naves by 19. 1093 columns 19 gates. Central plate of gold rest bronze 4700 lamps. Now outside 620ft by 440, walls 50ft high. 29 rows of col’ remain above 400. serpentine porphyri jasper granite. The 2d row of arches modern a new gothic choir

Gell taccuino 6 pag 071

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
casa blanca	Road from Mengibar.	Sierra de Jaen	Masana.	Kingdom of Jaen.
casa blanca					Sierra Nevada
Jaen river
Jaen river

a species of Inigo Jones Greek or Roman. One of the holy faces. Santo Rostro of Xt preserved here & cannot be seen without many of the priests being present. fine organ. Sacristy. New & elegant Capilla del Sagrario. Visit the President of the Junta, a little man Duca de Montemar but descended from Don Manuel Ponce de Leon. Mengibar & the Campillo de Arenes where the Bishop defeated the Moors who were to attack Jaen under Reduan belong to him. A very well bred Señor named Aranda visited us & carried us in his coach to his Brothers, & very good house, &

Pen and ink drawing: view of square
Specimin of building in towns. PLAZA JAEN. once possessed by the Moors

to the Dukes. The people played a game called viŝ a viŝ. The Duchess said she was descended from the house of Lancaster. The battle of Baylen being fought so near makes this people particularly sanguinary. One youth of 16 with a mild & very good countenance had killed 11 frenchmen with a knife which he shewed us. The great houses have a court or pillars as in Moorish times. Jaen 400 years under the Moors.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 072

126
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
River of Jaen		Granēna Monastery		Castle & Sierra of Jaen
			KINGDOM OF JAEN

The Provisor offered us rooms as indeed did many of the other Priests. One sent us two couple of fowls per force & would have sent wine. Our remonstrances against the paying of the bill succeeded, so we paid abt. 8 dollars for a very bad dinner & set out before breakfast, fearing more civilities. Indeed Don __ Aranda sent us the gazette of the battle of Baylen just as we quitted the inn. The French took nothing from the cathedral. We saw a fine silver Gothic shrine for processions. But no riches like those of Toledo. Above the town on a high Mountain is a ruined castle very like a Turkish fort. The place has an interesting appearance & is not often visited by Travellers. Baeza a capital city of this kingdom is now reduced to a small town Ubeda is another but [blank space] was long the capital of the Kingdom of Jaen.
In the direct mountain road to Granada is the Campillo de Arenas.
The people of Jaen were so little accustomed to see strangers that the priests quitted the service in the Cathedral to escort us.

Margin:
at Seville the Giralda
now only 100 000 souls. 2,500 silk looms
The Alcazar is Gothic Arab & modern
Cathedral 420ft by 260. high nave
82 altars 500 masses a day.
Giralda built by Algeber 280 feet high on it a large iron globe guilt [drawing: globe]
Spiral ascent no steps 2 horsemen abreast
Spaniards added the small tower above
now it is 364 feet high. on it a brass statue of faith. on the ball Alonzo de Ojeda stood on one leg to amuse the Queen
Pen and ink drawing: woman
Woman of Alcaudete


Gell taccuino 6 pag 073

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
CASTLE MARTOS		KINGDOM OF JAEN.

Novr 5 gloomy but not cold the middle of the day fine & warm. Quit Jaen at 15 p 9 return on the road we came for ½ a mile then in a very bad road skirt the foot of the mountain, there being no carriage road through it. About 10 p 11 tower & olives L on Mt foot. 10 to 12 house & gardens, 20 p 12 large village & on hill castle of Torre del Campo, where a decent Posada Stop to breakfast. Bill with our own tea 23 reals eggs & bacon of the house. The country well spotted with wood. A fine view towd the Sierra Morena. No reason why the french should not have escaped on the left of the high road unless the Mounts of Guadalupe could have intercepted them before the battle of Baylen go abt SW on base of Sierra de Jaen. Olives & fields. Ruined castle of Martos on a Mt insulated, high point. On R are the large Village of Torreximenes 2 miles distt. at 35 p 2. This village is on a post road. 15 p 3 + L qu Nra Sra de la Consolacion & gardens & a [drawing: arch bridge]. 20 to 4 Martos town & castle the entrance very romantic, the castle being very much elevated & the town on the side & foot of the hill. The boys in the places on the road fond of slings. Martos has a manufacture of cloaks called Punches

Margin:
Martos says Abul Casim p 187 very strong but small. of King of Granada. 8 miles from Mentesa or Jaen. The Xtians call it Mentesa.
Castillo de Hicbin.
near Martos a castle Hizn Alhicbin. taken by King Abencotba. Castillo de las Agilas p 188 Abul Casim
Betiz Abenhabuz K of Granada came out against him with 2000 foot & 500 horse. Not succeeding he built near on mountain a castle Heznalquilah or Castillo de las pendencias now Castillo de Alcala.
Hozonal = Castillo de dizensiones 4 castles against Cordoba & one called Hezntar – del duelo towd the sea.
Sevilla = Hispala = Medinat Himz. from an alcayde, Roman ruins are found at Martos, & Corduba. & at Toledo.

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: poncho
A man of Jaen, in A Ponche

Woman of Alcaudete dressed like Turks
Gell taccuino 6 pag 074

124
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
MARTOS		VIEW NEAR ALCU[DETE]

Nov 6 cloudy but warm. bill 6 dollars but civil people. South of the Guadalquivir, the beds are made on the ground as in Turkey, & the chairs are not in general above a foot high. People at the Posada very civil. Some of the inhabitants of Martos which is a large town called upon us to offer any thing we might want. quit Martos ½ p 8. 30 p 9 covered with olives & woods of prickly oak, fine country the Sierra de Aguilla L a peaked mountain whence the name. 14 p 10 house L. descend & X river then a hill. recross branch of same river 32 p 11 by a ford & [drawing: arch bridge] with a large cavern in the rock. hills very fine. a castle R. Oleanders. Ascend very steep hill till 1h. fine view both ways. under the peak woods & fields, like the Nomian Mts. descend. 20 p 1 fount & posada of Alcudete a town on the post road with a very picturesque castle & +. Turn L still keeping the Aguilla L. Olives, Women in Turkish dress red gowns & white shawl veils, At a garden some very fine cypresses & a summer house. X a [drawing: arch bridge]. 30 p 2 descending [+ in box] & cypresses. A tower on hill R. having passed another watch tower before, At 3h a few houses Cortejo de los Señores. X 10 p 3 a river to them the Algodone & ascend. R 2 more watch towers. 20 to 4h Vill & venta

Margin:
Ferdinand IV K Castille & Leon ordered 2 Carvajals to be thrown from Rock of Martos suppose not Peña de los enamorados No, for having murdered a Courtier. Benavides. They dying summoned the King to appear in 30 days before God, which he dying did. An English Play in 1832 made on this –

Vide top of this page
ALCAUDETE views 120
			121

Gell taccuino 6 pag 075

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
[ALCU]DETE			AGUILA

The road as bad as where there is no post. or worse. very steep & bad hill. 30 p 5 after a very steep hill houses. After this a moor* with the castle of Alcala la Real at the other end, at the other side of which is the town which reach at 10 to 7. A good Posada but the people had no money to buy eggs & bacon. At Alcala houses made of good stone & strongly built. There is a very pretty garden with walks & trees at the SE entry of the town. the castle is in ruins in it is a +. Many stone crosses about. The fount ornamented with arabesques almost five feet high. griffins & men. The streets good & people civil. Jalousies or lattices as in turkey, remains of Moorish custom. 30 p 9 quit gate trees & [drawing: triangle] chapel. At 10h fount soon after X a brook very bad or no road, a road turns R qu to Allora, brook runs with road. corn & spotted trees. 10 p 1 descend after steep & muddy ascent among fine Mountains & trees. see a magnificent cap in front in the Mts 30 p 1 through which the Vega & city of of Granada. & 3 Atalayas castles or watch towers. the scenery quite beautiful, Road turns R. 15 to 2 X [drawing: arch bridge] in the vale. 35 p 2 Vill Puente de Lopez. small Vill. good posada civil people. rather cold people say never snows 3 leagues from Alcala beautiful country.

Margin:
*It being dark the road was rather dangerous. passing 2 or 3 streams.
VIEW 118
bill 6 dollars. At Alcala the beds on the floor. even at Jaen beds on legs were particular “camas de madeira”. A blanket of cotton softer than Indian shawle & very warm said to be made at Granada & to cost 6 dollars.
Pen and ink drawing: gate
Puerta de Elvira
The King broke his lance on passing thro’ it against the Arch. Omen. Taken Prisoner.
vide view next leaf.
[drawing: peak]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 076

121
Pen and ink drawing: view of Alcaudete
ALCAUDETE distant		fine Mt.

15 to 9 Nov 8 a gloomy day with some rain quit PUENTE DE LOPEZ. Bill abt 5 dollars. ascend. steep. pass between two towers abt 2 miles distt & at 20 to 10 see vill of YLORA & its ruined castle R. descend, uneven uncultivated ground. spotted Trees. 30 p 10 see the Sierra Nevada & the Vega or vale of Granada. At 11h. a Tumulus artificial R. 10 p 11 X [drawing: arch bridge] over the muddy river of Velilla qu. Houses L. 20 to 2, Pinos Puente a large mud village houses painted pink church do with pilasters. 15 to 12 the [drawing: arch bridge] high canes perhaps 15 ft. Juego de Cañas? Gardens. 20 p 12 ruined tower in wood R. Turn Angle of Mt Elvira close out. from which < between a low peak on the hills R of valley & St Elena above the Alhambra 51o. 30’. < between St Elena end of Sierra Nevada about 41o. 20 to 1 stone 1 league ½ from Granada. < 56o. 30’. from Alhambra to peak R. < 93 from peak R to a peak [drawing: hill] L.

Margin:
in Puerto Lopez pass

Temp. Imp Carlos V. he came to pass a summer at Granada. was making a severe law against Moors but they sent him 80000 Ducats on which he moderated his edict. gave them leave to wear los trages moriscos. Of the 80000 ducats he gave 18000 to build his palace in the Alhambra. Covarrubios was the Architect?.
Sr Piedro Machucha maestro major de las obras de Granada
Built the new & fine Palace

Puente de Pinas
Pen and ink drawing: arch bridge
Not to be confounded with Fuente de Pinos of the Duel

Gell taccuino 6 pag 077

Pen and ink drawing: view of Alcaudete
ALCUDETE near

About 53 < from Alhambra or St Elena to a very steep & rocky high peak L. 9h House R. Vill Atarfe & the pointed rocky peak in line L, in line, Vill abt 400 yds dist L. Canes. 40 p 1 a house L. one league stone. L from St Elena to peak R 70o30’. St Elena to peak L 44. At 2h enter olives a house L & a Kiosk. X a [drawing: arch bridge]. 5 p 2 ½ league stone & house L. olives & Kiosk, one on left quite pretty with an avenue of Cypresses to a house. 20 to 3 X [drawing: arch bridge] over a dry bed & enter Granada. Palm trees. Gate of Elvira & Calle leading up to Plaza Nueva & Alhambra Amphitheatre or Corrida. Sole Posada not very good.
Atalayas round the Vega		Granada		To [symbols]
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Vide [drawing: peak] in former leaf	castle	VIEW IN THE SIERRA NEAR PUERTO LOPEZ	Vega of Granada Sierra Nevada	Castle		Castle
BEFORE but [encircled]	Puerta Lopes		Atalayas or Moorish Watch Towers
The women asked whether we liked our beds made on the floor or upon bed steads. The town seems very flourishing. houses very neat. on the outside, several of the old ones have galleries at top as at JAEN.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 078

119
The town of Elvira no longer exists, but the Sierra at Puente del pino retains the names. Caparsena a village belonging to the duke of Gor has many moorish antiquities such as sepulchres found there. The pass towd Mochlin, the E point of Mt Elvira & Alhambra in a line. The Fuente del Pino probably one mentioned to us as two leagues on the road pas’t the Cartuxa Monastery towd Albolote.

[Writing upside down] Pass of Alcala & Puerta Lopez
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Pass of Alcalá la Real and Puerto Lope

Gell taccuino 6 pag 079

Pen and ink drawing: view of Alcalá la Real
Vid. 2 leaves back	ALCALA LA REAL HEZNALQUILAH	looking Back
			Castillo de las Pendencias

The Alhambra at Granada is upon the lower step of a Mountain, with a deep ravine to the Darro on the L another on the R & a third which divides it from the Generalife a Moorish Kiosk & garden, higher up the Mt. The Gate & Calle de Elvira the Plaza Nueva & the Calle de Los Gomeles lead to the gate of the Granadas betwen the Torre de la Campana or Vela or watch & the Torres Bermeijas The last house in the C de los Gomeles evidently of Moorish construction, it has fountains & a court with arcades. & is built like the Alhambra [drawing: brick] several summer houses with cypresses in this street retain their original appearance. some of the jalousies are quite Turkish. The town is full of Moorish houses, consisting generally of a tower or moorish arch a court & 4 or 5 stories of galleries [drawing: galleries] within which are rooms. The plaza de Bivarambla is abt [gap] long & [gap] broad the houses from 5 to 6 stories of these galleries & except the custom house & the Archbishops palace just as it was. in it is the fount of the Leoncillo the lion of which may be Moorish. Even yet the place is used for great

Margin:
Spiders are said not to pass over the plaister work of the Moors. while over that of the Kings of Spain in the Alhambra there are many webs. –
Subterraneous passages in the rock of the Alhambra, said to lead to all parts of the City.
Near the Darro above the Paseo opposite to the Puente de Carbon on Passeo a Moorish house compleat with a door in a tower like the Alhambra equally good. gold red & blue the house a square court. 3 stories high [drawing: galleries] The horse guards of the Moorish Kings
The Plaza de Bivarambla is except the Archbishops house as it was in the time of the Juego de Cañas &c. being abt 6 stories high & all in galleries. Exept also the Custom house which is new. The Tocador de La Reyna is in a moorish tower though painted afresh by the King of Spains painters. KI Carolus imperator is painted on many parts of the adjacent buildings.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 080

117
Pen and ink drawing: view of Atarfe
ATARFE
in Vega de Granada
Sierra de Elvira

functions & religious processions. the magistrate retaining their gallery on the top of the Custom house, where probably was the Royal Mirador El Mirab. The houses opposite the sun have had shades. In some the Turkish lattice work yet remains perfect. The famous calle de Zacatin runs from the S.E. corner of the Bivarambla to the Plaza Nueva & is abt 12 feet wide. The Calle de Elvira may be about 18. that of the Gomeles wider. The Cathedral was a mosque but the court is now filled up by the nave. the circle of the Mosque is still preserved at least the form, & is very handsome with rich windows, & is entirely gilt. The place much subject to earthquakes, & the Cathedral has lately suffered. They say scarcely a fortnight passes without a shock. The houses seldom fall but the Moorish towers often fail. The moors had a way of building with earth & gravel in appearance & brick on the outside which seems to stand wonderfully well. Every house in Granada has one or more fountains.

Margin:
The Spanish Kings have in many parts spoiled the open Moorish Galleries by filling up the intercolumniations. particularly near the Tocador or peinador della Reyna & the apartments of the mad queen who was literally confined toward the court by iron bars. Wherever the Spaniards have touched the building it is ruined, both in taste execution & durability – They have imitated the tiles azulejos of the Moors ill & their plaister work worse. besides tearing up, the moorish pavements of green & white tiles with the colours of different patterns chiefly blue yellow & green, to place among the dusty Spanish bricks. The first court has a cistern, all is entirely a white marble pavement throughout the whole court.
Gold fish, now muddy water.
The gilding of the moorish roofs remains in many parts but the delicacy of the ornaments

Gell taccuino 6 pag 081

Pen and ink drawing: view of Pinos Puente
Sierra de Mt of Elvira	PUENTE DE PINOS		SIERRA NEVADA
				10956 feet high. point of Muley Hassan

Pen and ink drawing: view of Granada
				GRANADA	Approach to
St. Miguel	Albaycin silla del Moro Generalife		Alhambra Muley Hassan Xenil

Every street is also supplied with water as the Sierra Nevada never fails in winter or summer. Almost all houses are built round a court & many have marble pillars of Arabic workmanship. Oranges & Lemons flourish here. An American fruit called Chiremolias yas looking like an artichoke but with a continued skin & containing seeds & a white pulp like good butter & sugar grows at Granada. One of the gates near the plaza de Bibarambla is called the 

Margin:
is wonderful. The arabesques consist in patterns of flowers & fancy meanders very sharply executed in very white & hard plaster on grounds of blue & red & sometimes gold.
An inscription seems very often repeated as are indeed the flowers &…
Court of the Lions pillars diminish little if at all. About 8 feet high, white marble.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 082

115
Plan of a Moorish house under the Generaliph.
Pen and ink plan: interior

Pen and ink drawing: man
puerta de cuchares or spoons, & the gate through a tower in the angle opposite the Calle de Zacatin is called puerta de orejos 	probably the square was in the time of the Moors a market as now, & those who used false weights & measures were nailed by the ears to this gate as at this day in Turkish countries –
The Albaycin is on the R & the Alhambra on the L bank of the Darro. The Albaycin has many Moorish houses: one we saw belonging to a painter. Enter a great gate into a square room thence a smaller into a court in which columns, Moorish are placed in a square. a fountain [drawing: fountain] & Bath in the Alhambra style but very small, above stairs tiles and some good plaister work, but all much spoiled & the whitewash has almost obliterated the letters. Under the Generaliph is a house [drawing: house] & garden of a moor very pretty though decayed. Arabic pillars & inscriptions. canes. & fount or rapid stream of water running through the house. Under St Miguel in the Albaycin a gate called puerta Nueva Moorish.

Margin:
Granada city of 1173 Varas above the sea
Sierra Nevada has 2 tops: the highest called Muley Hassan 4254 Varas 3 inches 5 lines high
Veleta other summit.
Alhambra 750 varas above the Darro.
A Vara is 3 feet each foot 10 in 7/8.
Xenil has more water in the evening from the melting of snow in the heat of the day.

The pillars of the court of Lions are surmounted by Moorish arches of a kind of double net work of flowers & patterns to keep out the sun.
The sun, the motive for making the colums so low.
The court of the Lions & its apartments have the N side half covered with soil on the outside so that the upper floor is on a level with the ground of the platform before Carlos Vs palace. It being a summer apartment & therefore made cool in every manner.
above the recesses & the gallery in front of the Sala de las 2 Hermanas are small chambers very well & richly worked. on L of entrance to the Sala is an eastern [drawing: closet?] closet. On R of do entry is a stair case leading to the upper rooms or galleries.
now full of gunpowder.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 083

Pen and ink drawing: mosque
MOSQUE AT CORDOVA

The Iron work such as hinges bolts ornaments or studs of doors in the Alhambra is most exquisite [drawing: stud] the outlines are as cleanly cut [drawing: stud] profile of the outer door. the interior doors are cypress, covered with thin plates of carved wood very pretty. [drawing: door hanging] The manner of hanging the doors in the ancient greek method. There is in the circuit of the Alhambra a convent of blue monks who have in their + a part of what they call a Mosque it is in [drawing: plan] this form & the arches on the pillars are covered with moorish work. There is a most dreadful spectacle as an object of devotion a Xt on the virgins lap carved & painted all lean & bloody. A gate Torre de siete suelos near the tower which receives the water from the Generaliph is thus. [drawing: plan] There is a person named Zegri not rich but much respected as a good man in Granada. Maças also remain –

Margin:
The city of Alhama has many Moorish ruins very curious. much ruined. the loss of it the occasion of a romance
Great court of the cistern in Alhambra 138 feet by 72, Tower of Comares 32 ft Sqr. Pillars of do court centre to do 9ft ½ 
Court of the Lions
Long 110	broad 63
Hall of Abencerrages 35 by 17
Hall of 2 Sisters 23 square
From the wall of the court of Lions (outside) to the end of the pavilion or Kiosk in garden of Lindaraxa 54 ft.
The people seem rather inclined to Goitres at Granada qu snow water all the year round. At the Puerta de Hierro a curious summer house with water running or a Teke. In the Generaliffe a great cypress tree is planted in memory (Qu) of the deliverance of the Queen by the 4 knights. The Silla del Moro above the Generaliph is now the ruin of a square tower has been intended for a large castle.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 084

113
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Cave near Archidona	Archidona on other side of this hill

in the gallery at the further end of the court of Lions, & central compartment are 10 Kings evidently of Moorish painting. on roof. At each end gules a bend or with Arabic inscription. the arms of the Kings. this picture is in a place 14 feet long and abt 6 wide the roof [drawing: arch] les. They sit on a sofa & are very well done. Sofa black & red perpendicular stripes. The ground is gold with a very rich diaper work of Moorish arabesque flowers & stems. the latter black or blue. In the wall of do Gallery some plaster stars seem to have been let in, but they have alternately a bundle of arrows 3. & the letters TĀTOMŌTA Tanto Monta.
The houses yet remaining at the Albaycin particularly that of Mr Martines a painter like one we saw at Tangiers of the present day, the Door hung in the old way [drawing: door hanging] & much ornamented at Tangier.

Margin:
In the Sala de dos Hermanas The slabs of marble are 14 of my feet long by 6 & ½ wide. In this sala the gallery upstairs is wide & enriched, but has a Carlos V shutter next the hall, while the gallery window opposite it, next the garden of Lindaraxa has the old Moorish Zelosia shutter or lattice, but no body could have had room to get behind it as the gallery is not wide enough for a moderate sized person –
(qu a moorish device)
but Qu Carlos V.
Above the gate of Elvira is another moorish gate into the Albaycin.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 085

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Peña de los Enamorados from the Venta de Archidona

Pen and ink plan: Alhambra
ALHAMBRA

when el Santo Rey D. Fernando III gano a Sevilla el año 1248 he purified the great Mosque which Abu Jacub built in 1171 & made it the Cathedral. It remained till 1401 when it was rebuilt.

Margin:
D Henrique III in 1406 built a great tower at Cordova. Court of Cisterns or Alberca –
Why do authors confound hall of ambassadors with the Tribune of justice –
Tower of siete suelos must have 4 stories buried.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 086

111
Granada to Malaga Novr 28. 1808
28 Novr.
At 30 p 12 quit the Puerta de Elvira in two Caleshes. price 30 dollars. misty morning, clear in the middle of the day & a cold wind afterwards. 30 p 1 X the river Xenil over a wooden bridge. little water, being all consumed in irrigations. In 1h & 50m reach 2 leagues? Santa Fe, the camp & town of Ferdinand & Isabella. still a square in form. 2 churches. flat. The Soto de Roma of Kings of Granada, now of the Duke of Wellington belonged to Godoy who+ had a district entirely independent of the Chancilleria of Granada, with a house & an officer of his own. In 2h & 40m from Granada pass R Tchaouchina Vill. a castle or house 2 miles L on hills. Pinos Puente which we had passed through is on the R abt 3 miles. Its river comes from a gap in the Mts 3h, 30m from G a vill R & old tower. hills on L approach. 3h 40m from G, Village of Laca Xenil R near. 15 The plain ends. 15 p 7 Venta de Casina Cacin a good river of same name.

Margin:
white marble columns of Machel.
Granada 1173 Varas of Castille high above sea
Sierra Nevada top 4254 Varas 3 inches & 5 lines high
Muley Hassan seems the highest top from the Vega
there are two tops
A vara 3 feet each foot 10 in 7/8
Veleta other top of Sierra
Alhambra 150 Varas above the Darro.
Xenil in latin Sirgilis
it has more water in summer than winter & in the evening more than in the morning from the Sun of the day.
Comares sometimes Comaresch
Anciently there were fine courts -+ qu Paseos.
Moorish Kings property
Public audience in the great Hall called Mexuar. the King sate on a carpet Alcatif the council round him. The guard were african Moors.
X a river from L.
Allah acbar. great almighty Gd the war cry.
Their telegraphic towers.
Hernando dal Pulgar says in temp Juseph Abulhagiageh in 14th century Granada had 70 000 houses. In 1311 there were 200 000 inhabts about 500 were real full Moors &c… 50,000 rengadoe 30000 captives in the Kingdom
at most 350 000 souls
A road turns L to Alhama not far off
ao 1476 marmol says there were 30,000 vecinos. 8000 Knights 25000 slinges. & in 3 days 50,000.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 087

Xenil runs near the road R. At 15 p 9 Venta de Pulgar, a decent place – People very civil bill 46 reals or abt 11 shillings.
29 of Novr a grey day threatened but did not rain, in the evening abt. sunset the thermometer about temperate 55o. The Xenil runs in a valley with rocky hills on sides & a cultivated valley with olives. something like entry of Llangollen but not so rich.
Alhama Saltworks.
The sierra de Alhama L. In 1h 25m reach Loja having xd a stream. a gate & fount. Very turkish appearance, & cypresses. More of the town R of the river Xenil. Narrow streets still galleries on tops of houses.
About a mile beyond Loja or Loxa the Xenil turns off R towd Guadalquivir by a rocky pass with caves called “Los infiernos de Loja”. Ascend then down to a river running to Xenil in 2h. 20m. Ascend steep hills. Greek thyme Geranion lavender squills & cistus. 5h 15m on a top prickly oaks Belotes, the acorns very good for men & pigs men whith long poles to beat them down.

Margin:
BELOTES
In the [torn] 130 water-mills. & 300 pleasure houses. Masdew.
Devastation of the country Pulgar says in Mala alone the Spaniard destroyed & burnt 300 towers & houses & in Alhendin a league of olive gardens Panes & vines. In 1491 near Padul 15 places & 9 hamlets were burn’t.
Commerce between Moors & China cause of the fine vases & tiles. Silk cotton wood leather. Velvet. silk worth its weight in gold, cloth, glass. mining. Arabs traded to Qüantory & had a factory & Cadi. Mines of gold & silver or rather washing sand, but copper lead iron marcasite & zafilica.
Musical instruments 31 in number but a doctor in ao 618 of Hejira called Ramaleddin Giafor proved from the Koran that music & shews were improper among the names of four who wrote treatises of music Avicena in the library of Escorial
[Pencil drawing with watercolour: man] Aben Amar
The fatimite Library contained 1000 suppose 100000 M.S.S. in Cairo. but the Omniades of Spain had 600,000 with a catalogue of 40 Vols. The Arabs had 70 libraries in cities of Spain Ali Beker Mohamad says this –. A Female poet at Granada Naschina in the 5th Hegira and Mosada in the 6th century Moghia & Leila 2 others. Some greek works only preserved by their translations.
Zenith Nadir Azimuth &c. arabic names.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 088

109
Pen and ink drawing: ploughing
9 Peasants Ploughing each taking a different furrow

a great deal of ploughed country. 9 couple of oxen & 9 men with ploughs in one field. People all travel armed in this country. the top of the Sierra at 30 p 6 or 6h & 30min see the [drawing: hill] hill near Loja but R of the Xenil remarkable from Granada backwards & a very fine Rock near Antequera more remarkable than the Acrocinuttros forward peña de los enamorados. descend steep hill always trees, whole country prettily spotted with prickly oak. 7h all but 15m a venta. Aloe hedges. In 7h reach the Venta de Archidone a clean place. Vide View 2 leaves back. No Spaniard knows anything about the small inns on the road.
Pen and ink drawing: townscape

Margin:
The royal fortress of Alhambra 2690 castille feet long 630 wide the wall 2 varas thick about 10 & ½ high. 2 great gates & one less & communicatd with Generaliph. Tapiale of chinarro & Earth of the place & a very little lime. different durability.
The Alhambra begun by Mahmet abu Abdallah Benjusuph Ben Ahmed Naserita (a family name) or Elgaleb Billah or Vencedor por dios. died 1273. Medinat Alhamra or the red city – the 3d king of the Naseritas Muhamed Abu Abdallah built a mosque all painted with mosaic with columns with bases & capitals of silver.
The gate of judgemt between 2 towns 24 varas high & ½ each 6 varas broad altogether 18 varas. the arch 11 varas & ½ high from ground on the key stone the arm & hand.. the [drawing: arch?] arch is 3 varas ½ broad. marble of Machael. Praised be god there is no God but god & Mahmet his prophet & there is no strength but gods. an inscript Arabic says Abud Hagex Yusuph son of King Abulgualid aben Nacer April 1349.
Vide Vara measure in page of the Scold

Gell taccuino 6 pag 089

The gigs from Granada to Malaga
Pen and ink drawing: horses and carriages

In verse in the hall of Comares
From the rising to the setting of the sun all Arabia the happy salutes thee, & all the universe. This is the high conclave & we are its daughters. truly I have preference & the Glory in my race or species & I am the members of the heart without any division among them, for in the heart the force of the body & soul (spirit) originates.
another. “Y aunque sean mi adorno los signos de su cielo, con todo se echa en mi de menos el resplandor del sol que hace entre ellos. Cubrióme mi glorioso senor Juseph con vestida de alegria y primor sin necesitar de otro vestido; y me hizo trono regio, cuya altura iguala con verdad a la luz al talamo y al trono celestial.” the iron balconies placed in 1632. Inscription mentioning the beauty of this hall of the Embaxadores. Antiqüedades arabes. 1604. O hijo de Rey e descendiente de Reyes y à quien las estrellas en alteza no igualan, si a te se comparan! Si edificaste e ilustraste este tan rico alcazar, que es singular y de aventajada hermosura; palacio donde se demuestran las singulares excelencias de esta gobernacion, que en las escrituras se aclaran. Con el la ley de la salvacion ensalzaste en tanto grado que no se puede significcar, ilustrandola y a sus sequaces con extrema ventaja de seguridad y honor; por lo qual te son a cargo; pues con todos sus vasallos demostras amparo miserecordia justicia liberalidad soalzacion clemencia e ninguna crueldad e injusticia” –
On another. “Es el Rey Nasere el mayor de los Reyes; de cuya corte salen las grandezas de los triunfos, es el adestrador leader con poderio y valor, que a todos las naciones pone espanto. Es el que, si en el hemisferio se presentase, serian excusados en el los luceros. Es el que a los Reyes admira la limpieza de su nacimiento, e a quien los grandes imitan, viendo x

Margin:
Patio de los Arrayones
Inscriptions of the first court God alone is the conqueror. other inscrip in same court. The omnipotence of God Give glory to our lord & King Abulhagiagi whom god preserve. In the upper gallery an arch of 3 varas ½ lead to a chamber over the vestibule before the palace of Carlos 5 was built
The walls of cistern court 24 feet high Castilian. The cistern 124 feet high 27 wide 5 deep. the doors of this court are 4 feet ½ broad 8 high. above the 2 windows God alone is the conqueror.
Aben Hut Almayars arms says Bermudes de Pedraza. Argt on a band Sa There is no conqueror but God. sometimes a red hand. The antechamber roofed [drawing: arch]
Hall of Comaresch
the kind of work called Comarragia, Niches alternate gold blue white & red.
on targets Dese alabanza a solo Dios y. de consiguiente dense gracias al mismo Dios. The hall 40 feet square by 68. iii. The tiles 1 vara ½ high above this in ovals “o god to thee be given honour for ever. & o lord to thee incessant thanks. Give honor & glory to the King our Lord Abu Abdallah Elgani Billah

Gell taccuino 6 pag 090

107
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
Peña de los Enamorados near.
The Moor had a Castle on the top. Peña de los Enamorados near.
Story of the Moor against whose caslte the Queen came by a miraculous road. He leaped down.

The Venta de Archidone rather a good house. bill 5 dollars all but 2 shillings – quit it at 12h. L a large town called Archidone with a ruined castle. The plain Arcadian that is the mts rise at once from the flat. Robbers said to be deserters in the country one taken up at the corner of our venta this morning. In about an hour, at the end of the plain ascend from it leaving the Peña de los Enamorados L & the river of the valley left again of it. Story of an inhabt of Antequera running away with his mistress faster than the Justice could pursue on horseback. They threw themselves at length from the top. the rock really overhangs. A fine view at the top of the vale of Antequera very large, & the town of Antequera. the Vega very flat several trees. rich in corn. Abt 2h X the river from Archidone. at 3h 40m Antequera. in the way stones ancient Roman mark the road in the plain. Antiquera Anticaria large.

Margin: 
+ quan admirablemente ha dispensado su rigor y clemencia con los que debe; entendiendo que en dispensar sus tesoros en esto era la posesion que de ellos hascia. Perpetuamente quede sublimado en alteza; a la qual todos los Reyes se humillen e teman el furor de la execution de su shoulder espadla espalda ansi los naturales Moros, como los de otra qualquiera nacion.” Another
“Soy estrado carpet de esposo de linda hermosura y cumplimiento. Y si quieres ver la razon de lo que digo mirad la hermosura desde mi caliz e avertid en mi corona y tiara; y vereis como es semejante a la de la luna. Y Aben Nasëre es el Sol de mi orbe, de rutilante hermosura e ser resplandor, luce en alteza de estado, seguro de toda ausencia y apartamiento” Another
ornament Soy decoration aseo de magnificencia señal y hechura que sobrepuja surpasses a la felicidad: entendereis ser en este mi atavio ornament, este precioso caliz, alguno que esta en pie cumpliendo su oracion. Y todo lo que de el se vacia conviene que luego se le reitere; e con mi Señor Aben Nasere ennoblecio dios sus criaturas que procede del senor Alhazragi Zahade Aben Obeda.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 091

Antequera taken 1410 from Moors. Juseph Kg of Granada succeded Mahomet who died of a poisoned shirt. Ali sent by Juseph to Valladolid to Kg Don Juan, brought horses, velvet, raisins, figs almonds but the Queen prevented more truce, for he would not say Joseph was vassal of Spain in 1409.
Infante came to Cordova in feby. & besieged Antequera with 10 000 foot & 2500 horse. Sancho de Rojas Bishop of Palencia & Ct Martin Velasquez. Kg of Granada sent 5000 horse & 80 000 foot & his 2 Brothers Cidi Ali & Sidi Hamat but they were beat off, but Martyn Ruys de Avedaño killed by poisoned arrow.
A Real at Antequera.

ill placed old moorish looking town with a ruined castle. Some remains of moorish walls. Town composed of high tumbling houses ready for the first earthquake. Gardens before it well watered – There had been a Castle & a Royal Palace. It is a venerable old ruinous place. Stop about 2 hours for 3 guards there being thieves in the way. The people quite ignorant, took us for french which they knew was impossible. Hence a very uneven road with some picturesque mills & then a very steep ascent with a poor venta, arrive at the top in a cold misty rocky place 1 league & ½ see the sea & descending a little a venta, Venta Nueva a poor place the poorest we had seen where sleep. Quit Venta Nueva Decr 1st early cold strong wind & mist. Hence 7 leagues & ¼ to Malaga of which 6 are a steep & winding descent. In the course of the first hour the climate changed. A bridge & custom house in about a league it became warm, dwarf palms thyme in flower & all the shrubs of the Mediterranean coasts. In a short

Margin:
In hall of comares 6th “Sutilizaronse las manos del artifice di me tez e lustre, despues de ser adornadas las perlas de mi corona e tiara; e parecen en semejanza de aseo decoration e tribunal de esposo, al qual y demas en mi, hay ventaja. porque en mi esta segura la felicidad de mi esposo – El, que a mi se allegare con demanda de quitar la sed, en mi hallara hartar con licor claro e puro, sin macula ni comistion alguna, E ansi soy semejante al arco de la oscuridad que aparece; y el sol de ella es mi Señor Abulhagex: siempre luce su palacio seguro como el palacio divino durara abrigo e amparo de los bienaventurados.” There was perhaps a fount in this hall – Paseos.
Pencil drawing with watercolour: man
Jew
Hall of Comares.
“llevo ventaja à los hermosos con mi amicto y tiara; e ansi se declinan a mi los rutilantes luceros del cielo en los signos. Parece en mi el agua en manera de religioso, que puesto al medio dia del lugar de su oracion se pone a orar: seguras estan por la sucession del tiempo, mis ventajas: mi deseo es hartar al que esta sediento, en manera que parece haber yo demostrado esta obra liberal de la mano de mi senor Abialhagex. Siempre dure en mi orbe lucero espléndido ansi como los luceros del cielo fueron ilustrando la oscura tiniebla.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 092

105
Pen and ink drawing: view of Málaga
AT. MALAGA C: Lucida

time we came to olives & a burning red soil the mountains very steep sometimes covered with vines in terraces, sometimes with broom. A clear River ran on the right the road made with care & very good, sometimes conducted zigzag up a rocky point to avoid the circuit of a very long peninsular Mt. Stop to water our horses at a Venta where is an oil mill. Prickly fig hedges & aloes. A monastery with cypresses and oranges. At length in a broiling day Dec 1 come in sight of the plain of Malaga, bare but cultivated, with farm houses but no trees Better about the town, the descent becomes less rapid half a league from the city. Pass a Monastery with a fine walled grove of oranges & lemons R. See a fine Casa de Campo & oranges L once belonging to the Jesuits. At Malaga the climate Dec 1. 2. 3. & 4 quite delightful, much too hot in the sun & the nights not cold. In the sun the Thermometer rose immediately to 95 & in the coldest situations was about 65 Dec 4. Green Pease cauliflowers &.. plentiful. Almost all the walls built by the moors. but not now walled round. A good moorish gate near the Alameyda or parade. Fine cathedral & organ. the port made by a natural projection & a pier. The sea & sky equally serene. The Thermometer from 70 to 76 & 78 from Decr 1 to 20 & only one cold wind during that time from N.W. The number

Margin:
The venta de Galves a large inn on the road close on R
In 1364 when Kg Don Pedro held his court at Sevilla “mandò facer estas alcaçares e estos palacios e estas portadas que fue hecho en la era de mil e quatrocientos e dos” Inscription on frize. This by Arab architects
The sala llamada de Embajadores del mismo alcazar. But Jalubi of Toledo first built the palace as says inscripn in Arabic. “Jalubi fue el arquitecto di mi obra y maestro mayor. Fue venido de Toledo con los demas maestros Toledanos a mi palacio y maestranza de Sevilla. Yo el Rey Nazar por la gracia de Dios.
Sidi Achmet Elegacel Ambassador from Morocco to Carlos III translated Arabic inscriptions in Spain
Pen and ink drawing: head
An Andaluzian head
Duquesa de Gor’s Coachman who drove us up to the Alhambra with 4 horses, only two of which had reins She called him Mi hijo.
Pen and ink drawing: head
an Andalucian as a dancer of Volleras. Bolero’s
Churriana the Frascati of the Malaguenians
Pencil drawing: head

Gell taccuino 6 pag 093

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: gate
Gate of the Atarrazanas or Naval storehouses on the Alameda at Malaga
MOORISH
The two castles are called Alcazaba & Gibralfaro at Malaga.
Marble Gate at Malaga. C. Lucida

of inhabitants notwithstanding the yellow fever said to be 70,000 Granada 80,000 but the people of Granada say Malaga has only 30,000 inhabitants. The rage against the french here, much less violent than at Madrid. About the 12th of Decr the Madrid post

Margin: 
On the shields of the vestibule of the Lions court “& the beauty of which you possess emanates from God – the court 126ft long 73 wide with cloister. 22½ high, corridor 7½ wide 128 columns 10 ft high 8 in ½ diamr. dos cenadores of 15 feet square 25 high
The Taza of the great fount 10½ feet in diam. the lions 2ft½ high & all the font 8o. 6”. the whole 12 agon.
[Numbered 1-8 alongside paragraph below]
Verses on font “Bendito sea el que dió al Principe Mahomad una habitacion, que con su hermosura sirve de adorno a todas las habitaciones. . 2o Y si no ahi está ese vergel en que hay maravillas, que no ha permitido Dios haya otras que les igualen, ni aun en los dos santuarios.” 3o Y un heap monton de transparentes perlas, cuyo brillo resplandece con los saltos del aljofar, continuamente agitada.” 4o Y no sabemos qual de los dos es el que mengua imperfect. –
5o No ves con qué confusion corre el agua y sin embargo caen de nuevo sobre ella otras corrientes?
6o a manera de un amante que se deshace en lagrimas, y que las reprime por miedo de que haya quien las haga manifiestas.
7 imperfect –
8o Y quizá no es en realidad mas que una blanca nube, que se desprende sobre los leones.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 094

103
[Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: shield] Colour of Shields & Bands often Changed.
[Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: shield]
[Pen and ink drawing: shield] Andalucian Arabs

ceased. The next account was that the French with 40,000 men were there, but no official news had arrived on the 20th. Report says the french had lost at least 10,000 men, had not succeeded in entering Madrid and had encamped at the Pardo where they were surrounded, why then no post. The order for enlisting all persons between 16 & 40 years of age only begun to be put in force in Malaga Dec 18. No kind of communication either to Malaga or Granada when the central junta fled from Aranjuez to Badajos. nor indeed had there been any regular communication between the army at the frontier & the junta at any time. The junta are said to have examined all the letters in the post office at Madrid to find out Traitors, & the Marquis de los Perrales was in consequence torn in pieces by the mob. Genl De Juan also by his own soldiers whom he had ordered to retire from Somosierra, on the approach of the french.

Margin:
inscriptn on fountain
9o De tal modo se extiende la mano liberal del Califa, que quando franquea sus beneficios, alcanzan a los furiosos leones de la milicia.
10 o tu que miras esos leones, a quienes la falta de vida impide exercer su furia. 11o o heredero de la Sangre de los Naseritas! no hay gloria que se iguale con la de haber heredado ‘èl poder y grandeza que tu hará despreciar à los mas encumbrados magnates. 12o La paz de dios sea contigo perpetuamente, teniendo en sujecion a tus subitos y domando a tus enemigos.
a great repair of the alhambra in the 17th century the canals either made or repaired then but the court once paved with blue & white Paseos. Green not blue. In 1575 the Alhambra was repaired.
Private mosque, is under Governors house. now a chapel, Moorish columns gilt capitals shields of Moors & Spanish Kings. latticed gallery for Harem. Abul Hagig the Kg who finished the Alhambra died there. Abul Hagig King in 1333. He had a very long beard died Black. defeated at battle of Salado with the Kg of Morocco by Kings of Portugal & Castille. built schools. All villages of 12 houses had a mosque.
Gate of Justice built by Yusef, in 1348. Built the Alcazar of Malaga. now crumbled. very great decoration. Houses had fountains & Towers. The arabian poets called Granada a silver Vase filled with emeralds & hyacinths. Alonzo XI Kg Castilla.
Gell taccuino 6 pag 095

Wa la ghalib ila Allah
& no victory without God
[Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: shield]
[Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: shield]
[Arabic]
Shields of equal size over the Moorish Gate at Malaga
Wla galib Alla Allaec [slanted]
wala ghaleb illa allah tallah
rhaleb

[Arabic]
[Latin alphabet backwards] we
Allah alli belagh al

& none victorious but God universal
mirador repaired for Philip V & Doña Isabel.

In it – was Bizim Allah Elrachman elrachayim & God be with our lord & Prophet [Arabic] & to his people & friends health & salvation infinite &c
God is the light of heaven & earth &c
Vide other page further on.

Pen and ink drawing: building
TOCADOR
PEINADOR
EL MIRAB now MIRADOR DE LA REYNA. TR. OF COMARES

Gell taccuino 6 pag 096

101
besieged Gibraltar but died of the plague. Yusef made a lamentn for his enemy. Moors put on mourning. Moors besieged at Gibraltar attended enemy’s funeral in respect. This all the way to Seville. Yusef in 1354 in mosque of Alhambra a maniac from behind ran a dagger into side. The murderer cut in pieces & burnt to satisfy populace. Buried in a Tomb of white marble “Here lies a King & Martyr of an illustrious line gentle learned virtuous, renowned for the graces of his person & his manners, whose clemency piety & benevolence were extolled throughout the kingdom of Granada. He was a great prince, an illustrious Captain a sharp sword of the moslems, a valiant standard bearer among the most potent monarchs &c &c &c. – Tomb no longer exists – This in Marmol.
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: man
o Joachim
To Granada by Alhama.
Malaga to Velez Malaga on horseback 4 Hours. Turn Left into Mountains. Velez to Alhama 7 Hours. Alhama to Granada 7H seeing in way the baths.
Granada to Jaen by the direct road thro a pass. Quit Granada at 5H. leaving the Vega a Village at 9 where stop 45 minutes. At 4 p M a Village in Mts. Next day set out at 5 Jaen at 1.
Pen and ink drawing: woman
An old woman of Malaga

Gell taccuino 6 pag 097

Pen and ink drawing: quayside
MALAGA

Quit Malaga Jan 1st 1809, no certain news had arrived of the french at Madrid though they had entered the city on Decr 4th. Sail to Gibraltar with Captain Fleming in the Bulwark 74.
Zagri p 237 Guerras Civiles brings news to El Rey Chico but he had a “Marlota negra” he fell half dead at end of speech
This messenger has green mantle.

AY DE MI ALHAMA
Three of ye Ten Chiefs in the Hall of Justice in the Alhambra
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: three men
Gell taccuino 6 pag 098, 102

99
Pencil drawing with watercolour: landscape
MT EDGCUMBE

Gell taccuino 6 pag 099, 100, 101, 104

NOTICE.
WEdnesday the 30th January 1811 at the Royal Theatre of S.t Carlos the following entertainment will be exhibitat for the benefit of John Baptista Gianini chief composer of ballets of said Theatre to commence with a grand Symphony, which will be followd by a ballet in three Acts entitled
The whimsical party, or the end of importunity.
After which one of the mast pleasant farces hether to laid before the Publich will be performd, the whole to terminate by a grand serwies Dance entitled
The Templ of Death.
Inwich Laurence Lacombe is to dance a grand Solo. His composition is the production of said Giannini who will consider himself truly happy should this small specimen meet the same encouragement which he has so repeatedly experienced from an enlightend audience, for the space of fine years, during which he has had the honour of submitting his compositions before a Nation which a mongst other distinguishd qualities, is admired for its indulgence & for encouraging the feeble effort of those who submit them solves to hs criticism.
The Theatre will be brilliantty lit. & the performance will commence at 6’ o clock.

Margin:
NOTICIA
QUarta feira 30 do corrente mez de Janeiro de 1811 a Sociedade do Real Theatro de S. Carlos representará a Beneficio de João Baptista Giannini, legitimo Compositor do dito Theatro, hum agradavel divertimento : abrirá a Scena com huma grande Synfonia, finda esta se exporá huma Dança de meio Caracter dividida em tres Actos, que tem por titulo
La conversazione ridicola o sia La fine degl impertinente.
Depois se seguirá huma das melhores Farças que estão em Scena, e terminará todo o Espectaculo com huma grande Dança fabulosa, que se denomina 	nova
Il Tempio della Morte,
Na qual Lourenço Lacomba dançará hum grande Solo A referida Dança he composta pelo mesmo Beneficiado : elle se reputará assaz feliz se esta sua fraca producçao não desvanecer o conceito que este illustrado Público lhe tem patenteado pelo espaço de sinco annos, em que elle tem tido a honra de compôr para huma Nação, que tem por base animar aos que se expõe sobre a Scena.
O Theatro estará todo illuminado, e principiará ás 6 horas e meia.
Na Officina de Simão Thaddeo Ferreira. Com Licença.
Gell taccuino 6 pag 103

[Arabic]
Yedibensor alm

[Arabic]
Ben Almahkmud

[Arabic]
y a los suyos con perfecta Felicidad &c
benediga

[Arabic including kufic script]
Madixa Selim Celi

Pen and ink drawing: boats
Criador sumo
Alhaliq Alhadim.
council = Alcazd
Paz = Alhoma
Tristeza = tahra.
Sangre real	Fadhal caltana
Fe = hiemah
[Arabic]
Billah
malhoma = pugna
hazaña = Taurih
hope = diz.
sangriente = mudmia
Almacadi = unfortunate
Criador Sumo = alhaliq alhadim
Paz = Alhona
volunta de dios = cidn


MEDITERRANEAN BOATS
[Arabic]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 105, 107

El Rey Don Jayme went with a silver hammer & mucha genta to knock down the Mosque & destroy all traces of the Moors at Valencia. No ruins therefore left there –
Alcazar of Granada in Alhambra built by Pedro Berruguete for Charles V. Colonnade of Breccia. 1537.
The bridge at Ronda 300 feet Chasm – 600 feet deep.
Zahara citadel with town at foot of rock – in Moorish history near the Guadalete.
Torre Vieja scene of Earthquakes in 1829.
Murcia. pure Moors yet
Purchena seat of Rey Chico at foot of Sierra de Filabres eastern shoulder of Sierra Nevada
perar [vertical]
Ruined Castle. Had trees. had 7 000 houses now only 400.
Macael – Antonio Vicarro Maestre de Canteras or quarries.
Quarries a league above Village. Pines. 7 blocks ready cut for London	White marble of Macael

Pen and ink plan: Málaga
Gibralfaro the Arab Castle
Alcazaba the palace
EYE PLAN OF MALAGA

Gell taccuino 6 pag 106

97
Pencil drawing: landscape
Pencil drawing: ships
Pencil drawing: cart



Gell taccuino 6 pag 108, 109

NOTICE.
FRiday 28th the December 1810 in the Royal Theatre of S.t Carlos a Benefit of Rosa Lourenzani, first Dancer of the Theatre, on to represent by the Society of the same to well accepted Borlet entitled
THE HEAD RISCALDATE.
Finisched that wether he will have one pompous & new Dancing the composition the Petter Maria Petrelly, that have for the title
The Conquest of the Isle the Bourbon by to Arm Britich.
He shall be adorned the scene & clothes proper to the character. He will have also one great accompanying the Troops.
This action & translate the leafs the Courier the London narration steril that the leafs we to say this glorious event that done so many the honour for Nation Britich, it appear that no give pleace the to fill the time that owe, to last one action pantomime, reasoa for that the Compositor had that to be worth the speech of the, when no let him be true to serve for to enrich this action & to shew sometime the no humanity the men, e the generosity she men other.
The divertisement to give end the Spectacle the third & fourth act the agreable Borlet
THE SEVILLA BARBER.
This the Spectacle that for the Beneficed he has honour the to offer the respectable Publik, of whom to hope protection.
To begin at 7 óclock.

Margin:
NOTICIA.
SExta feira 28 de Dezembro de 1810 no Real Theatro de S. Carlos em Beneficio de Rosa Lourenzani, primeira Bailarina do dito Theatro, se ha de representar pela Sociedade do dito a bem acceita Butleta intitulada
LA TESTA RISCALDATA.
Finda que seja haverá huma pomposa, e nova Dança da composição de Pedro Maria Petrelli, cuja tem por titulo
A Conquista da Ilha de Bourbon pelas Armas Britanicas.
Será adornada de scenario, vestiario apropriado ao character, e terá tambem hum grande acompanhamento de Tropas.
Esta acção he extrahida do que nos referem as folhas do Correio de Londres. A narração esteril que as ditas folhas nos dão deste glorioso acontecimento, que faz tanta honra á Nação Britanica, parece que não dá lugar a prehencher o tempo que deve durar huma acção Pantomimica; razão porque o Compositor teve que valer-se de episodios, os quaes quando não sejão verdadeiros, serviráõ para realçar esta acção, e demonstrar ao mesmo tempo a inhumanidade de huns, e a generosidade dos outros.
Dará fim ao divertimento o III. e IV. Acto da agradavel Burleta
O BARBEIRO DE SEVILHA.
Este he o Espectaculo que a Beneficiada tem a honra de offerecer ao respeitavel Público de quem es[…] protecção.
Principiará ás 7 hor[…]
Na Officina de Simão Thaddeo Ferreira. Com Licença.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 110

95
Sala de las dos Hermanas Alhambra. the eastern chamber of the lions court is the Abencerraxes hall on the crest the Sala de las dos Hermanas –
Marble of Machael. 4 varas & 21 inches & 2 varas & four inches wide.
Enter by an arched gate the side of which ½ marble ½ stucco. Inscription “aid o God our lord Abulhagiagi. Give glory to our King & lord Abulhagiagi whom God assist. And the beauty which thou hast emanates from God. God is our the help in all affliction, In another place is in entry inscribed “Hapiness.” & again “God alone is the conqueror”. The alcoves called Alhami. The Mirador of the garden of Lindaraxa. Among the azulejos the arms of Mahomad Abu Abdallah. Among the inscriptions “My structure disposed with exquisite art has passed into a proverb, & my praise is current in every ones mouth.
Another Alli’ tambien los obscuros marmoles ya desbastados y bruñidos despiden su resplandor, y convierten en luz las tinieblas. Other “Te pareciera que los orbes celestes apresuran su curso para hacer sombra a las columnas de la aurora porque sale mas temprano.
Other “Quantas asperas y toscas piedras se han empleado en este Alcázar, resplandecen en fuerza de la luz que reciben del mismo regio palacio.
Another “The stars themselves obey & serve this King, In truth those who are employed in the service of his princes merit the greatest honours. another “and if they stood at his side they would haste to serve him while the bystanders would rejoice at it.
Other. “Oh quanto desean los mismos astros el esplendor si en ella tuvieran fixo su asiento y no tuviesen que recorrer al hemisferio.
[Arabic across whole bottom of page]

Margin:
These inscriptions are in medallions ornamented with shields & other inscripts – in which Dese Gloria perpetuamente al Señor de ella. Sea el reyno perpetus al Señor de el “The omnipotence of God” other. “Give glory to our lord Abu Abdallah. – In the mirador of Lindaraxa also “give glory to our King & lord Abuabdallah. Verses “El que me viere me tendra por una muger que habla con aquel aguamanil, manefiestandole su vivo deseo de conseguirlo. Other verses Quando el que mira considera mi belleza su misma imaginacion desmiente su vista.” other Solo Dios es vencedor God give perpetual help & victory propicious to our lord Abuabdallah, emperor of the faithful. Again S D es Venced give honor & praise to the King our lord Abu Abdallah, son of our lord Abulhagiagi, Solo Dios &. – Other “Este es un alcazar de cristal. Ele que lo mira lo tiene por un pielago que rebosa y se derrama. – other. God is in himself goodness itself. He is above all merciful & His truth is great.” other – Hapiness. Above is a frieze of fine carv’d wood.
P72 Arab library. Tarph & Motalmesus [Arabic] wrote a poem against their protector King Amrun. Motalmesis suspected a letter of recommendation from the King, but Tarphe went. The letter. In nomine tuo Deus. Ab Amru Ebn Handa ad Alcabaram Ubi ad te literae nostrae per Motalmesum pervenerint, fac ipsum manibus & pedibus truncatum vivum defodias

Gell taccuino 6 pag 111

Pencil, pen and ink drawing with watercolour: two men
Specimen of the clay figures.
CONTRABANDISTA	BEGGAR

+
otra tal, que siempre les dexa: con la qual el autor de la hermosura excedió los limites de su perfecton, E ansi quando la dulce aurora de la mañana espira con el resplandor del sol, se demuestran perlas clarisimas que no se pueden significar. E con esto entre mi (id est) entre esta alcazar y la felicidad; hay notoria similitud, é la similitud emana de mi proprio ser.

Margin:
In other inscriptions. excerpta
“all is the work of the great Aben Hacere may god preserve his state among Kings.
Another “Glory to the most noble of all the ages expugnador de las ciudades nuestro señor Abu Abdallah gozo y contento de los Naseritas. Above the Hermanas an apartt. ascended by a stair on R In this chamber Solo dios es Vencedor. ornamented with leaves & flowers, & “The omnipotence of God”.
An Idea that this was the queens apartment, Paseos,

Gell taccuino 6 pag 112

94
Pen and ink drawing: view of Tarifa
Moorish Tower or Atalaya		TARIFA		Tarifa Tarifa

Tarifa seems a very poor place having the ruins of an old Moorish Castle behind which is a little bay The country round it is not promising – There is an island of the same name. qu the tower on it.

I translated this from the Arabic
On a Moorish Victory.
The Wrath of God on Christians pour’d
They perish by Thy fatal sword
While Victory hails by heavens decree				alhokema
This day the Moslem led by Thee

Dixò El Sabio Ebn Habuz
Asi se defiende el Andaluz
This was written on the weathercock on the Albaycin
iakul al Hakim Ebn Habuz
hacza johama al Andaluz
[Arabic]
Ebnhabuz
hakza
gohama
[Arabic]

Pen and ink drawing: weather cock
The Weather Cock of Aben Habuz
This also pointed to the quarter whence an invading enemy was entering the Kingdom of Granada.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 113

Pen and ink drawing: view of Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR								Europe Pt. Europa p

Roads on the West side of the hill of Gibraltar to a great height. On the top of the rock magnificent views on all sides, & the precipices of the rock itself uncommonly steep and bold. Pretty cottage of the Governor on East side. Near Europa point a flat place entirely covered with stone & uncultivable. Some pretty situations for houses. The Commissioners is a beautiful place & beside a large garden has green fields within an enclosure, & well wooded.
The English took possession of a small rocky island called Parsley isld near Apes hill which they have now quitted.

Margin:
MIRADOR OR TOCADOR, ALHAMBRA
In it views of ports very bad but the Arabesques of Bartolomé de Ragés & Alonzo Perez & Juan de la Fuente in 1624 are good, some call the place the PEINADOR. it was repaired & adorned for Philip V & Dona Isabel. In the 16 century there was here an inscrip Arabic. “In the name of God gracious & merciful. God be with our Lord & Prophet Mahomet. & to his people & friends health, & salvation infinitas veces. God is the light of heaven & earth & his light is like himself. It is like luminar which having many says is himself alone & is lampara de lamparas, as if it were a shining constellation, & burned with holy oil neither Western nor Eastern, & which burning shines (alumbra) & without being touched (sin tocarlo) Es luz sobre luz. And God guide with his light Him that seeks it. God gives Proverbs to the nations & God is omniscient in every thing – Supposed to have been a MIRAB in the time of the Moors, or a kind of ORIEL. The hall of Fruits &cc on old foundations says Paseos: The prison of the Sultana a Inner bay, it might be of the mad queen, but the grating made ao 1639 as appears from a paper in the Contaduria.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 114

87
Pen and ink drawing: townscape
Torres Bermejas	Pinos Puente	T. della Vela	Sierra d Elvira	Torre de los siete Suelos

Pen and ink plan: Bay of Gibraltar
Pen and ink drawing: wall 	Plan	+ a greek tower
BAY OF GIBRALTAR

At Cartieia the building on the highest point is Moorish. There is one tower of the Greek wall + [indicating drawing above] remaining but not perpendicular, at an angle which was the upper point of the city – The style of this is similar to that of Mantinea & Ithome, without mortar, but the blocks are not large – The Theatre may be on Greek foundations, but the superstructure is evidently Roman. The mouth of the river is now very shallow, & even small boats can scarcely pass the bar at low water. The site is covered with unhewn stones & broken tiles –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 115

Pen and ink drawing: view of Gibraltar
Moorish walls	GIBRALTAR

This view is taken from a spot near the Governors summer cottage E of the rock. L are seen some walls said to be moorish. High up toward the peak is seen the powder magazine
Margin: Mochlin the right eye & Illora the shield of Granada Alhama – 


In the Granada library are poems of Abu Baker Mohamad Ben Abrahim Almari Alcarschi who had This on his Tomb.
I translated this so
As God ordains my death foredoom’d must be
Kings, Prophet, Adam all preceeded me
Go Thou prepare who glories in my death
For soon shall Fate require thy latest breath.
Born at Silves 28 miles from S. Maria

Valadata Dau’r of King Mohamad Almostakphi Billah born at Cordoba wrote verses of which translation. “Aspectus noster vestra vulnerat corda: vester & aspectus nostras ferit genas. Pro Vulnere vulnus: jam pares ergo sumus. Attamen genarum vulnus acerbius semper erit.
[Arabic]
Abdusi a noble of Cordoba in love with her.
Some poems end in a letter as [Arabic] whence called Siniat. one of Ebn Badis of Cordova commented by Ahmad Ben Alhagi of Granada. Hegirae 759.
Mohamad Abi Baker Altalmasani of Granata

Gell taccuino 6 pag 116

85
Ebn Alkhatib Mohd. Ebn Abdalla Chronographus to Kg of Granada wrote History of Granada & Bibliotheca Arabico Hispanae. & of
[Arabic]
Estepona	Marbella	Sahil	Velez
[Arabic]
Vera	Schalubania	Salobrena

Al Algeciras is a better place than it appears from Gibraltar, There are two squares or plazas – Behind the town is an aquaduct & some gardens. On the whole however very miserable. A tolerable inn for Spain.

Mohamad Ben Alhassan ben Makhluph Alraschedi. Granatensis wrote Comt on “de arte metrica” of Kathiri ben Abdelrahman ben Alasuad Alkhazai of Corduba.
Salaheddin writes in Lacrymae queribundi & impatientis Amantis Thus. Me rapit elegantia et pulchritudinis amor. neque mirum nam ille viros fortes. Rapit et molles. Jam me delicias inter atque lusus perditum cernis.
“Tot tibi sunt dotes virgo quot sydera coelo”.. Isa ben Mohamad ben Isa in Granada library.
In Hegirae ao. 588 or 1192 Xt. Margaritarum series ac Apparatus Vestis elegantis & laneae & others collected by Mohamad Ben Abdelhac Algasanita Granatensis ao Heg 571. Laudativa amatoria et moralia.
Dhilvazratin Abi Abdala Ben Alkatib of Granata wrote history of Spanish events & his travels to Africa & return to Spain & congratulations on it. 3d day Saphari ao Heg 748.
Mohamad Ben Md. Albalisi ben Ali of Velez wrote dialogues of 50 professions.
Authors of Cordoba numberless. Gardening &c & all the sciences.
CAPITAL. COURT OF LIONS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 117

Pen and ink drawing: view of Cádiz
PORT		CADIZ	LIGHTHOUSE

Cadiz said to contain 60 000 inhabitants The houses are high, & well built, but are disfigured by grates of iron at every window. Solano’s house not yet repaired Jany 23d 1809. The whole story of his Treachery said to be fabulous at Cadiz. The streets very narrow but almost all in right lines & generally at right angles to each other. The Theatre fine but being too deep [drawing: plan of theatre] very bad for hearing. The best places seem to be almost all taken by the year, so that a stranger is ill accomodated. Saw an excellently acted comedy there El Si de las Niñas – The house full every night a thing very rare in Spain. The cathedral a fine building unfinished like all the great buildings of Spain, of white marble heavily ornamented in bad taste corinthian pillars in groupes of 10 &c &c..

Margin:
[Arabic]
Laus Deo pro ipsius beneficiis
Alhamed lellè halà Nahemhi

Bless God for what exists
on capitals
[Arabic – kufic, pen over pencil]
Alhamdu – nahma
Alhamdu –
of Mecca [Arabic]
of Egypt [Arabic]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 118

83
Pen and ink drawing: tile	Alhambra Azulejos

The sea rages so violently against the walls as to have destroyed a sentry box at the angle of a bastion. The houses very damp the air being filled with the spray even when there is not any wind. The fortification toward the isthmus strong & not wide. The isthmus occupied by a road on each side of which seats of marble & beyond these gardens. The road is perfectly straight for some miles. A new cut is now making about a cannonshot from the city from the sea to the port, by way of defences the whole island being only separated from the terra firma by a narrow channel in some places not deep at low water though dangerously muddy. There is a bridge over it. It is said 25 000 men would be necessary to defend the whole. The two points of St Catalina & Castel Gordo on the main land are within the reach of shells.

Margin:
because You would live in The
Because you would
English part of the town. Adm Flemings
live in the English part
note
of the Town

500 yards wide
500 yds wide

was only a flat sand till Count o Reilly executd it

Gell taccuino 6 pag 119

Pen and ink drawing: view of Cádiz
Cerro de St Christovalle
CERRO DE ST CHRISTOVALLE PORT		CADIZ Cadiz		ISTHMUS

The Port dificult to enter on account of rocks some of which are visible & others not. The river from Puerta Sta Maria brings much sand into the port. The country is remarkably flat near Cadiz. The Cerro de St Christovalle & that of Ronda however produce cold when they are covered with snow. The climate however delightfully warm in January, but wet & misty. No communication with the central Junta at Seville. Mr Frere said to be translating old Spanish odes, and Buonaparte at Astorga, but no real intelligence

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing: tile 
Alhambra Azulejos

Pen and ink drawing: columns
Balustrade of Windows in the Tower of Comares
Spanish Authors say El Zagal killed his brother muley Hassan. Zagal took his treasures & Sultana & shut her up in T of Comares where Aixa & her Son Abu Abdellah had been confined.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 120

81
T. della Vela
Pen and ink drawing: townscape 
Torre de los siete suelos gate here

Tangiers is said to have 2,000 inhabitants about 50 christians 500 jews the rest Moors – The streets dirty & full of stones. The shops little square places a cube of 6 feet flat at top as are the houses. The jews industrious & make slippers, sell morocco leather chiefly red & yellow & very fine. The sheep very fine cost from about 2 to 4 dollars. Oxen about 25do. Provision cheap. About 80 french in the town with a consul only 50 french allowed to reside there More horses seen in Tangiers in two hours than we had seen in all Spain together. A tolerable one costs about 20 dollars – The people generally wear a white mantle of woollen or cotton few have the turkish coloured dresses & those use them for foreign countries.

Margin:
Heschamo Ben Adelazri restored the walls of Ubeda in 886. & Lebi Ben Obaidallah built several public works in the Montes de Cazlona.
In 1238 Valencia conquered & Mosque destroyed.
A Miramolin Son of Mahomad built walls & castle of Talavera de la Reina.
Bridge of Toledo Mahomad Elimen called of Alcantara. Kg Alonzo el Sabio restored it & Phuto Ben Abraham built 2 mosques.
Jucef Abu Jacub built in 1171 the great mezquita at Sevilla. walls on N en el patio de los Naranjos are his. Aqueduct from Alcalá de Guadaira to Seville. made bridge of Boats over Guadalquivir.
His successor Almanzor jacob finished the Alhama & the Tower Giralda, begun in 1000. Then Architect Gever or Hever A Sicilian Abu Alayth placed on it unas manzanas of gilt bronze of great diameter, value 100 mil doblas de oro.
He built Hasnal Faragh on river now S. Juan de Alfarache with towers & walls.
Many other things at Seville the Torre de Oro on river. el alcazar which Don Pedro afterwards rebuilt by Arab architects. Also various houses for his heroes some of which have left no traces.
At Zaragosa a mosque burnt in 1050.
Palace of Salobreña with hanging gardens.
Walls of Jaen, Baza & Guadix restored by Suario Ben Hauduin in 898.
Vide page following on back
Gell taccuino 6 pag 121

Pen and ink drawing: view of Tangiers 
SAND		RUINED MOLE		TANGIERS

The garden of the Sweedish consul just beyond the walls, very pretty. walks under orange trees with hedges of Geranium & passion flowers. A fence of canes reeds half living and spliced with others –
Consuls of Portugal, America, Spain & England here. A mole now ruined might easily be repaired & would defend even large vessels. The sea here clearer even with a strong E wind than at Cadiz. Hedges of Prickly figs. Country covered with brush wood. A Fonduk or Khawni the town consisting of a court under the arches of which horses stand, & above a gallery opening into the rooms. The

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing: building 
Part of the Alhambra

Ali called Assad Allah Algaleb
The Lion of God victorious
Haidar also Lion
also Faiz al anvuar
Distributor of favours or lights.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 122

89
Pen and ink drawing: view of Alhambra 
Albaycin	Silla	Generaliph	Alhambra	Alcasaba

doors all [drawing: arch] like the Alhambra. A mosque (see view) consisting of a gate into a square court of 3 arches [drawing: arch] covered with green glazed tiles made at Tetuan. The interior consists of 6 parallel roofs supported by arches, altogether very low. At an angle is a square tower on which is hung out a white flag at the hours of prayer. several of the Moors speak a little English. One of the best houses had a small court paved with brick, from which a very clean whitewashed staircase ascended to a little gallery which had a large door into a very clean long narrow room covered with a mat. at each end was a bed. & the whole was very comfortable. The door shut like the doors of the Alhambra & the fashion little changed. Many guns on the batteries at the landing place. The walls towd the land in

Margin:
Granada. Alhambra cuyas zanjas para los cimientos mandò abrir el Rey Mahomed. or Elgaleb Billah natural de Arjona despues del año 1231.
Juzeph o Bulhagix at length finished it in 1346. Walls of Albaizin also & the Generalife arches bridges &c.
50 mosques & colleges built by Mahomed ben Abdelrahman 1200. Also a Basilica for judges. a great mosque in Alhambra with baths, at expense of jews & Xtians.
La Casa Marmorea near mosque built by Mahomad Ben Said of Alcala la Real monastery of Supleitas, moros austeros contemplativos y grandes escritores.
Termas de Abdelrahman Ben Mahomed & secretary of Kg Ali in 518 of hegira. –
Colegio maximo by Kg Juzeph in which Aba Adala taught natural sciences history Rhetoric & poesy.
College of Moors in Malaga in which studied the great jurisconsult Ebu Haphud Alamin in 1353.
Another in Murcia in 1163.
At Sevilla with academia biblioteca y monasterio produced several great writers.
Mozarabes Xtian architects succeeded.
these left off [drawing: arch] but made [drawing: arch] more columns.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 123

Ao Dom 1809

bad repair. Hence nine hours in good weather to Tetuan – Aman of Xeriff who talked Spanish had an astonishing number of children –
Margin: El sobriño Abu Abdallah or Abu Abdihelsi was of same name as his Uncle. Therefore the Uncle was called El Zagal or Valiant & the Nephew El Zogoybi or unfortunate

Pen and ink drawing: gate
Puerta de Elvira Granada.
END OF TOUR IN SPAIN 1809

A Spanish romance begins thus
“En tiempo que el Rey Theseo
“Residia en Badajoz
Y quando Maricastaña
Allà en Castilla reynò.
Quando hablavan las bestiasiii. &c &c.

Margin:
Against the inner arch of this gate the Moor broke his lance on going out with the King. A fatal omen.. At the last siege Muza walled up this & other Gates.
The ballad says the Gates were of Brass

Gell taccuino 6 pag 124

87
ALHAMBRA GRANADA
The House of the Alcayde spoiled by repairs. in it the royal chapel was the royal mosque There is a mirador overlooking the carrera de Darro. Mahomet 3d called also Abu Abdalla built the mosque the chapel 21 & ½ varas 9 & ½ wide in the mosque a few plaisters or stucco of Solo Dios es vencedor remain, The columns are all arabic. The niche for the Coran remains
A building alaparte oriental del Real Alcazar called Palacio del principe destined by Mahomed ben Juseph to Ismael his brother or because the prince of Asturias lodged in it when the R family came last to Granada. There is a hall 21 varas broad & 20 long. & in it inscrip Solo dios es vencedor. cupolas & hanging niches very rich in roof. In the next room an inscrip “Al mismo Dios.” This hall 5 varas square 10 & ½ Varas high. 15 windows in it on E W & North. & “And the beauty thou hast emanates from God.” There is a mirador in this edifice which is very highly ornamented & supposed a Mirab. At the E of this Palacio del principe a mosque 5 varas long 5 & ½ wide. 7 & ¼ high. “Solo dios” in it now a Cinta (belt) makers houses “God is our help in all affliction.” – “Give Glory to God & consequently give thanks to God himself (or the same).
On the Right of the calle Real says Padre Echeverria is the Cadis house.
Pen and ink drawing: view of Algiers
Algiers

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing: view of Tunis
at Tunis
170 years after Hegira was Abd ar Rahman ben Moaire, ben Hashim Al Adaghel or the intruder, last of the Ommiades – He escaped from the Abbassides & with some Berebers seized Spain. Hashim 1 was his Son – Next Al Hakem 1 Abd ar Rahman 2, Mohammed 1, Al Mondher, Abd Ali, Abd ar Rahman 3. These reigned 279 years Ommiades. Hashim & his Hajib or Minister Al Mansour, rivals of Haroum ar Rashid & his Vizir Khaled ben Barmek.
il’ Allah [Arabic]
Fatima – Lubna – Ayesha. Mariam learned Moorish Ladies Ayesha was beautiful like the rising moon – fine & slender like a young aloe bending its head to the southern breeze. if she ran she looked like an antelope disappointing the sportsman by her rapid flight, & if occupied by study or meditation her eyes resembled the soft & melting eyes of the Gazelle looking from the top of a rock on the burning sands of the desert.
Ibn Hayan.
Gell taccuino 6 pag 125

Pen and ink drawing: view of Gibraltar
Devils Tower
St. Georges Hall
Gibraltar taken with the camera Lucida from the sandy isthmus

Gell taccuino 6 pag 126

81
MT EDGCUMBE
Pencil, pen and ink drawing with watercolour: landscape

Gell taccuino 6 pag 127

Pencil, pen and ink drawing: landscape

AT MT EDGCUMBE
TOUR IN AO 1810

Pencil, pen and ink drawing: landscape
Devils point		St Nicolas
View	From the window	Cremill ferry

Gell taccuino 6 pag 128

77
Ecija on Xenil above confluence with Guadalquivir. Hottest place in Spain. Moorish blood. Azulejos, Cortijos = farm houses. Jose Maria famous Robber who always hand picked horses – captures.
Cosario the Carrier of Antequera. Galeras covered waggons. The majo or fancy national costume. Western side of Granada is Xenil. The Monachil Monachil joins it. Above Monachil nearest road to Sierra Nevada. After quitting gorge Monachil sweeps through a flat in front of Village Azubïa the sort of Frascati of Granadines. The place beseiged from Azubia, West of which all is a dreary waste – On East near gate of Elvira is the circus & the paradise of Cartuxa. It gives 2000£ per annum. Above Cartuxa reach Viznar country seat of Archbishop. Viznar several hamlets well seated. The Vega a poor soil except from irrigation. sandy loam running into clay. Macael for white marble. Fine people, upright but not stiff. arms set back & very graceful. Eyes sunk in large sockets. Aquiline nose regularly curved. fine teeth. Greatest part of City Carrera del Darro Zacatin & Puerta de Elvira. Xenil always large. Darro much covered. Theatre near Carrero del torro
Zacatin [drawing: lines] with Darro a bazaar from the Bivarrambla to the Plaza Nueva. Whence to R is the Calle de los Gomeles towd Alhambra & to left the Calle de Elvira. The Cathedral on site of mosque & in it many pictures. Tomb of an Archbishop of marble of Macael same as las dos Hermanas marble In the quarry are now blocks 12 ft Square At + of Geronymites is buried the great Gonzaloo de Cordova.
Most of the Flecks in walls are by lightening French spoilt pavement of Macael marble in first court, & blew up Re Chicos tower.
Above Alhama Sierra de Tejada, ĪLLŎRĂ, ALŌRA. Alhendin.
Cadiar Along.

Pen and ink drawing: temple
TEMPLE AT MT EDGECUMBE

Larch? none now in Spain
What is the wood called Alerce by old writers? A Moor of Sevilla in 12 century says enough to shew that the Moors knew all sorts of tricks with trees. He does not mention the Alerce. The Mosque at Cordova roofed with it & some yet remains, Gutters of cast lead for Moors knew not rolling. Thuya articulata is the alerce & it grows in Barbary.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 129

Pen and ink drawing: landscape
CREMILL PASSAGE	Dock

Pen and ink drawing: garden
MOUNT. FLOWER GARDEN. EDGCUMBE

Gell taccuino 6 pag 130

75
1810 VOYAGE TO LISBON
4 Days all but 3 or 4 hours Thermometer below 60
October Tuesday 23. 1810 Plymouth Cremill passage.
Go on board the Poictiers 74 Cap Beresford about 4. Sail about 6 from Causand bay Wednesday24 at 12 off Ushant. cold. high sea Wind fair. Thursday 25 Oct latitude 4o6:5’0. Friday 26 of Cape Finisterre having a run of 240 miles in 24 hours Saturday 27th Mondego off Berlengas at 12. See the palace of Mafra. About 2 a pilot came on board in an old boat with 2 other men. The oars made of 2 poles on which a deal board was tied. the sail [drawing: boat]. A decayed walnut shell mended with a wafer box, a most dangerous tattered vehicle. The man began by sayin d- my eyes. and assured us the French had sent flags of truce requesting a cessation of hostilities which Ld Wellington would not grant.
Anchor in the bay of Cascayes

Pen and ink drawing: Palace of Mafra
PALACE OF MAFRA 27 Octob 1810

Entering the Tagus the country on the north bank is very ugly & barren. without trees.
On the south where the high land joins the sand is the Village of Tariffa
Pen and ink drawing: windmill
Portuguese Windmill

October 28 pass up the Tagus by the Castle of St Julians L, the fort Bugia R. A long line of Sand stretches from the Southern shore towd the fort. L a mirador of the King, having passed in a valley a palace of Count Henriquez Tuera with gardens & Trees.

Pen and ink drawing: view of Belém
Lisbon	almāda
BELEM
TAGUS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 131

Pen and ink drawing: view of Fort of São Julião da Barra
Bay of Cascayes	ST JULIANS	Octob 28 1810

Pen and ink drawing: view of Belém
BELEM

Belem is an old town built for the purpose of commanding the river Tagus. The usual residence of the English is West of Lisbon at a place called Buenos ayres, which is much colder than the town and damper being a hill between the town & the Atlantic. The opposite bank of

Margin:
[drawing: crenellations]
Battlements of Belem Tower

[drawing: crenellations]
Sentry boxes & all the rest corded

Gell taccuino 6 pag 132

73
TORRE velha
Pen and ink drawing: view of Fort of São Sebastião de Caparica 
VIEW NEAR BRANDAO	Torre Velha

the Tagus very pretty with the town of Almāda and a point running from it to the E which is remarkably shivered as if by earthquakes, in many parts. After this point the bay river opens toward the South & becomes much wider. On the opposite side, the country is not high toward Palmella. At Belem on the 3d of November see the Palace & garden. The stairs at which the Prince embarked are very fine [drawing: stairs?] Behind the palace in the garden is an aviary among the birds was a + [link to drawings of bird in margin]

Margin:
[Arabic]
Archytas
[Arabic]
aristoteles
[Arabic]
Tarentinus
[Arabic]
Xenocrates
[Arabic]
Dion of Syracusa
[Arabic]
Dionysius
[Arabic]

Pen and ink drawing: two drawings of bird
Bird in the Royal garden at Belem

Greek names from the Arabic Books of Granada
[Arabic]
Alexander
[Arabic]
Dion
[Arabic]
Aristotle
[Arabic]
Pythagoras
[Arabic]
Philolaus
[Arabic]
Socrates
[Arabic]
Salamina

Gell taccuino 6 pag 133

Pen and ink drawing: view of Cacilhas
POINT CAÇILHAS
Tellescope & Camera Lucida. Point below Almada. from Lisbon

The garden is regularly laid out in walks at Belem. A Pillar is shewn where the palace stood which was burnt. Behind the Palace is a church where the King was fired at, at the time of the great earthquake. The Monastery at Belem very curious the stone remarkably beautiful & the carved work at the great door of the church, the pillars in the inside, the roof

Pen and ink drawing: view of Palmela
Palmella from Lisbon
Palmella from Lisbon with Telescope & Camera lucida

the cloisters &c &c are most beautiful. Several of the Kings and Queens of Portugal buried here.
Specimen of Arabic in Greek names
Plato natus est Athenis patre Aristone viro pernobili ex Solonis genere qui Atheniensibus leges dedit – In Escurial library
[Arabic]
Athenis	Aristonis	filius	Plato
Solonis

Gell taccuino 6 pag 134

71
Portugal 1810
Pen and ink drawing: view of square through railings

On Sunday Nov 4 1810 go to the army about 24 miles from Lisbon, dine with Marshal Beresford meet Ld Wellington & Marques Romana. The English Portuguese & Spanish scattered about in the villages & woods on the western side of a high ridge. The french under Massena about 6 miles east of it. Junct on a high flat by a wood. Sobral a village below our lines, in the hands of the french. Ld Wn. at Perro Negro. Marshal Beresford at Zapateria. El Marques Romana at Enxheira dos Cavalheiros. Sir Brent Spencer at a pretty Villa called as Fontinhas the fountains, with orange trees & a pretty garden. House at Zapateria by no means bad. Astonishing quiet

Pen and ink plan: interior and garden

Gell taccuino 6 pag 135

70
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
[Symbols]	Serra de Junto	[Symbols]

prevailed everywhere considering how near the enemy was. The English fort on a high and very cold spot the highest point between the sea & the Tagus in this line. In a carriage it takes about 6 hours to go 24 miles in the direction of Sobral, & not less on horse back. Town of Loures in the way 2 leagues from Lisbon. On the road many pretty Quintas. See the source of the Tagus toward Santarem. The country as far as the British line extends very uneven and the roads well commanded by forts erected on the occasion

Pen and ink drawing: landscape with buildings
ON THE SOUTH BANK OF THE TAGUS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 136, 138

69
LISBOA
Pen and ink drawing: view of Lisbon

At Lisbon the N wind is cold. but the town is entirely sheltered by the hill on that side. With a Westerly wind the air is warm but in the autumn like all places on the Atlantic foggy & damp, and often rainy. Grapes begin to be rather scarce in the middle of November. The houses very high some 6 or 7 stories & the generality 3 or 4. The Opera house of Sant Carlos very magnificent, & the court always procured good actors. The lanes ranged round 3/4ths of an oval. The proscennium has 4 columns but they make part of the oval. The stage is remarkably deep. There is a Spanish Theatre called Salitre with a set of Spanish comedians and dancers.

Margin:
Pen and ink plan: opera house


Gell taccuino 6 pag 137

68
Pen and ink map with watercolour: Lisbon and Tagus

Gell taccuino 6 pag 139

66
At the Theatre called from the street Rua d’os Condes are Portuguese plays, and very excellent grotesque dancing. The men appear to leap as high as rope dancers, and twist round in the air very quickly. The streets at Lisbon would be impassable in a climate like that of London, for every species of filth is thrown into them, but they are generally to be crossed without getting wet and in the new part of the town built by Pombal there are side pavements. Here are 2 very handsome squares with excellent houses. The palaces of the Nobility are not half so handsome as those of Madrid. The town being on a slope & sometimes on a very steep hill might easily be cleared of all filth but at present this collects in certain places which do not appear ever to be dry or clean. A few

Margin:
Pencil, pen and ink drawing: street scene
Schiada
Schiada

Pen and ink drawing: man

Gell taccuino 6 pag 141 [140 blank]

67
Greek names in Arabic from Library at Granada & Morocco.
[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]
Ariston	Lampsacus	Isaac		Bion		Euclides
[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]
Cyricus	Menademus			Apuleius	Son of Naucrates??
[Arabic]	[Arabic]	[Arabic]			[Arabic]
Timolaus	Demetrius	Aristoteles			Archimedes
[Arabic]	[Arabic]
Ennius	Omar ben

[Arabic] Gallus
[Arabic] Taurus
[Arabic] Bos
[Arabic] Babalus
[Arabic] Camelus
[Arabic] Elephas
[Arabic] 
[Arabic] 
[Arabic] ovis
[Arabic] Aries
[Arabic] hircus
[Arabic] anser
[Arabic] Columba
[Arabic] Ciconia
[Arabic] Aquila
[Arabic] Noctua
[Arabic] Cornix
[Arabic] Corvus montanus
[Arabic] Turtle
Numberless books on Agriculture.
[Arabic] Ben Chotaba. noble of Granada wrote ao Egirae 511 universam Ruris disciplinam. Alhagi Ahmad of Granada ao Egae 553 wrote do.
Books on Manure on irrigation on Gardens on Fruit trees on all trees [Arabic] Quercus Bellota
[Arabic] Alfistak Pistacia –
[Arabic] malum punicum. Abdelrahman brought it from Syria to Corduba. 12 sorts
[Arabic] pinus – [Arabic] Cupressus
[Arabic] Rosa [Arabic] Aliasmin.
On grafting Greek persian & Syrian
How to make one tree flower at pleasure. like Knight. & fruit of many colors. pictures & writing on apples how Vine & fig branches of all colours. Ut uva vinaceis vacet. all sorts of smells & flavours from trees & to grow larger.

Margin:
Algebra by Othaman Said ben Mohamad Alocbani Granatensis. Poem on it by Mohamad Ben Alcassem Granatensis ao Hegirae 711 –
Albumasar prophecied from stars that if the religion Maht lasted till year 1000 of Hegira the Arabs would have all Spain ao Xt 1680. or Hag 1091.
[Arabic] and Bussorah?
[Arabic] Aben Malek
Grammatica Ben Haiani of Granada [drawing: cog].
De Vini Laudibus
[Arabic] orange
Alberikuk
[Arabic] Sacchari arundines
Muza a divine fruit [Arabic] Banana
Almauz Poma Adami a sort of fable
[Arabic] Calamus [Arabic]
Alfarsy [Arabic]
[Arabic] populus
[Arabic] box.
Kgs of Granada had near 100 000 horses in sui. bellique usum & sometimes 200000 troops says Cassiri from Annals.
on Burning glasses
Veterinaria.
on distance of moons centre.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 142

65
Pen and ink drawing: landscape with villa
Villa near Alhandra on the Tagus
Battered by Lieut Frederic Berkeley
Belongs to Señor Lopez

boats ply on the river to take passengers from Belem Buenos ayres &: to the other end of the city. The opposite coast by Almada is very pretty. Buenos ayres a continuation of Lisbon to the west. Here the houses have gardens. The Palacio Quintella is one of the best in the city. It is a large house with a pretty little garden but excepting fine Tapestry in one room, there seems very little difference between the decorations of the interior and those of the common houses of the town. The Arsenal very spacious, 2,000 men employed in it. The look very magnificent & the academy on a most extensive scale as far as the room goes. The booksellers shops not good. There are very few books in the Language except on religious subjects. Several of the most

Margin:
Pen and ink drawing: carriage
fixed stairs
King of Spains journey from Madrid to Lisbon. Several yet remain –
Bod

Gell taccuino 6 pag 143

64
Pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
CINTRA

common Spanish books are translated. Two streets the Rua d’ouro & Rua de Prata in which gold silver & precious stones are sold. a severe law against selling imitations for real jewels. Over shops Bom Vim for good wine. Gabinete com decencia para bebidas frias. A play called the death of Captain Cook in the isles of the Hottentots. Other inscriptions in shops. Cha Caffe e Sagu. Bixas Boas good leeches. Bebidas doces. Bobedas doces & agoas ardentes. Armacem de Musica. Oath “cem pipos de diabos”. “100 pipes of devils”. At a Cake Shop Aqui se vende Pão de luxo. Removed from – Antonio Jose de Coelho filho de Elvas or de Coimbra removed from Elvas or Coimbra. 

Margin:
Inscriptions on a church wall. Viva Maria Viva Jesus. Jesus amoroso. Jesus, meu, espozo.
Caffe y Xicolate
Street called Rua dos Santos velhos

In a Spanish poem
“Ni que el Doctor don Apolo”
“Alla en Delfos respondiesse.”

Boms vinhos de todas as calidades.
In enquiring at 20 houses to find a person the man knocked at the doors crying o Sir Josè The answer was regularly quim e? – answer Seu criado – que procura?
One of the women – a grotesque dancer was called Evangelista & was often cheered when she performed well – brava Evangelista.
Rapaz a boy & Rapasida a girl
Bom Fim the name of a Ship.
The English sailors called the stick with which the mules are beaten “Arriba” Mule” Arrivo Sticks.
Gallician carts “commissarys fiddles”
Coimbra the English soldiers called Queenborough.
Gell taccuino 6 pag 144

63
Pen and ink drawing: landscape
A Quinta occupied by the French.		Villa Franca

This Quinta was occupied by the french when they were in front of our lines at Alhandra it was consequently much ruined by the fire of our boats. Round the house is a beautiful orange grove.
On the 24th of Novr being Saturday we got up before daylight breakfasted with the windows open without being cold & set off in the Admiralty boat up the Tagus to Valada where the English boats were conveying troops &c across the river. Went in the Admiralty barge 24 Rowers to 12 oars. A very fine boat up to Vallada above 35 miles in 8 hours. passing. Saccavem a Village in a very pretty country on the right bank of Tagus

Margin:
An Irishman shewed the Adml the curiosities in the Museum, among other “An Italian Mummy from Aigypt.” Also a chrystal with a drop of water in it. “It is water for all its so hard now”.
The same man speaking of Mad Owenhausens talent for music translating Portuguese into Irish said “Och she has a prodigious fundament in that line”. music
fundacião.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 145

62
Pen and ink drawing: view of Alhandra
Fort	Alhandra	Lines

Povoa Alverca & Alhandra where the heights & the English lines come down to the water. from Alhandra to Villa Franca the bank beautiful the southern shore flat, and sandy islands. At Castanheira another range of heights comes to the water. Passing this see Alemquer at a distance. Further on at Villa Nova hills on N bank recede. Very flat on each bank. on the S see Zamōra. After Villa Nova see Azambuja L at foot of hills. An island ends on R or S. See Benaventa on S bank at a great distance next convent of Jerico & then Salvaterra a great hunting palace with a town & opera house & woods & plain for coursing. very ugly.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 146

61
Pen and ink drawing: buildings
Inn on the road to Cintra
Inn in the way to Cintra

soon after reach Valada an ugly flat meadow like Lincolnshire. The houses protected from the Tagus by a high bank. Ld Wellingtons headquarters then at Cartaxo about 5 miles distant. At Valada the meadows were very like England & equally green. Mallows, Sow thistle & other herbs. Plenty of Pumpkins. A sailor carried 6 on a stick. The French were at Santarem separated from us by a bridge only, on which both had sentries. The sailors at Valada who were transporting troops across got 5000 across through the river is very broad in an hour. A
Decr 4 a lovely hot day go to Bemfica in a carriage in one hour Gardens to the country seats at Bemfica very fine oranges &c Thence by Queluz a royal palace in a low situation to Cintra passing over a very ugly country without trees.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 147

60
Pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
CINTRA

Gell taccuino 6 pag 148

59
Watercolour painting: bath
MOORISH BATH
[Arabic]


Gell taccuino 6 pag 149

58
CINTRA
Pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra

Gell taccuino 6 pag 150

57
Watercolour painting: corridor


Gell taccuino 6 pag 151

56
Pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
VIEW OF CINTRA FROM MRS DACEYS

Mahomad or [drawing: heart] Ahmed = le desirè
He called himself. Ana Al Nabi la kedheb ana ebn Mothleb
Also Al Nabi la Kedeb
His enemies called him El Nabi al kedeb.
or The lying Prophet. Pretended his name was found in both testaments. Xt being called “The Desired of the Nations.”

Margin:
[Arabic]
Ali Ben Reduan
[Arabic]
[Arabic]
Ali Ben Reduan also
sous Alaksa is Mt Atlas

Gell taccuino 6 pag 152

55
Pencil, pen and ink drawing: landscape
Cork Convent

Decr 4th 1810 a very fine warm day visit Cintra. In one hour reach Bemfica, a village in a dip with some houses gardens & a church. See that of the Marquez de Abrantes. It is now much neglected all the gardens of Portugal are in the same style & very pretty with oranges of all sorts &c&c&c & fountains. An artificial rock & cascade. The small orange or myrtle here.
In another hour reach Quáluz on Left. a large German looking palace in a hole

Margin:
with a village round it & ploughed open fields.
In 3 hours more through a very ugly country like the worst parts of Derbyshire with stone walls, & very bad ruined paved road reach Cintra. The first sight of it is beautiful. Descend into the village. The houses, trees, waterfalls from the hill &c&c the most picturesque possible. The palace on a very pretty hill insulated. The number of roofs make its appearance very singular. Two spires are kitchen chimneys. The whole is

Gell taccuino 6 pag 153

54
Pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
CINTRA

an imitation of Moorish work & at a distance looks like parts of the Alhambra but nearer wants the ornaments. A very good inn or two in the village it being the resort of travellers in the summer, & 11 degrees cooler than Lisbon with water perpetually running. The height above the sea is great & it is exposed to the N wind. At the Marques de Marialvas house here the convention

Margin:
of Cintra was signed. The tops of the hill are often bare but some are covered with pines. The royal family have another palace about ½ mile nearer Lisbon. In the Moorish palace the apartments have azulejos like the Alhambra but ill done. The great hall of the swans has a very richly gilt & painted roof with swans in compartments but the walls are half way down whitewash. Another room has [drawing: magpie] por bim. Some of the tiles are

Gell taccuino 6 pag 154

53
Pencil, pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
Mrs Daseys		FROM THE PALACE AT CINT[RA 1810]

in raised work of Leaves &c.. The place abounds in all sorts of fountains & tricks cisterns &c &c. The cieling of the great square tower has the arms of many of the Portuguese families, that of the conspirator Tavira painted out. The room inside is 14 yards square. The ceilings roofs are all fine or pretty the walls all whitewashed or meanly painted like scenes. view over the sea Collares Mafra &c&c but the distant country is ugly.

Margin:
LADRAŌ
O Ladraō Ladraō
Di mi roubador
De ente la gente
Falla meu amor

Ingrato Ladrao
Robador de vida
Que me ten roubada
Toda mea querida.
Joachims song.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 155

52
Pencil, pen and ink drawing: view of Sintra
[FROM THE PALACE OF CINT]RA 1810.
Peña verde
Saldanha
House of Jos An Ferreira
Marialva Palace where the Treaty of Cintra was signed

OS EMBAIXADORES
O embaixador dos deoses
Por a Mai de amor mandado
Cingido da luz celeste
De ajutarme este recado
2 A mai e amor do destino
O secreto libro abrio
O que a todos e verdado
So a me eu des-cubrio.

Margin:
SI TU NON GOSTAR.
Si tu non gostar di me
Otra pastora mais ha
Que eu amarei tambien otra
Saō Son voltas que o mundo da.

Dexar huma achar hum ciento
Ó ceas que prazer sera
Son prazeros doplicados
Son voltas que o mundo da.

si tu non gostar de me otra pastora mais ha que
[Musical notes in pencil]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 156

51
Pen and ink drawing: tower
TOWER OF BELEM
from Buenos Ayres.

CERTAINTY OF REPORTS ON GOOD AUTHORITY.

Wednesday Novr 4 [symbols] The french before the lines of the allied army at Sobral not more than 35 000 fighting men, desertions daily reducing them besides sickness, in total want of provisions. on the point of despair. The Genl supposed to be ready to lay down his arms, & very compleatly conquered. Communications entirely cut off
The desertions from the french innumerable, the army ruined by it iii
Nov 5 imposible for the french to retreat, 20,000 + Militia in their rear. Abrantes occupied by the allies the bridget under the walls of the town which is very well fortified, [symbols] Able to withstand the enemy if he does not come with more than 100000 men. No possibility of that. Lisbon safe for the winter
The French have no artillery nor amūnition
The Portuguese regulars 50,000 men with cavalry [symbols] The french pursued us before Busaco so as to leave behind all their guns xx
13 Novr The Frenchh retire to Santarem will lose all their rear in the retreat, will be surrounded by our forces 38 000 English & 20,000 Portuguese. Santarem an unfortified town. The french in great trepidation dying of disease & famine. Nok feark whatever of the enemy on the south side of the Tagus. No bread.q
Novr 17. Impossible for the french to retreat the rains having swelled the river Zizare. No materials either for bridges or boats.
Want of every thing, wish to retreat if possible. Try to get off their cannon by degrees that they may retreat quicker No possibility of receiving succoursx. The Zizare swelled by rains totally prevents communication or z retreat. The french in distress for want of Salt o Portuguese said Wine.
The returns of french passing through Bayonne this war 500000 men of which compared with the returns Decr 1810 280000 are dead or prisoner.

Margin:
The french (_______) have 65,000 men without reinforcements.
The french have provisions in such plenty that they left stacks & fields untouched on their retreat. WG
+ French retreat to Santarem Novr 13 without loss or attack
iii In the year 1810 the french lost by desertion 1500 men the English alone 480 –
No bridge at all at Abrantes. There was once one of Boats at some distance from the town, which may be taken any time by a coup de main.
Jan 1811 They have many more guns than the due proportion and a sufficient supply of ammunition
The Portuguese m have no more than 20,000 men [symbols] The h General not being at home the french retreat without losing more than 500 men at most. They have time to fortify the causey at Santarem and bid us defiance.
xx The french have more and larger guns than we. xx
Santarem the most impregnable position in Portugal. xx The french have more guns than requisite for their numbers.
The french ask the English officers to an opera at Santarem. kThe enemy under Soult arrive at Badajos jan 8. Rations of bread regularly served. [symbols]
In the course of a fortnight 3 bridges over the zizare a dock yard at Punhete on the Zizare. No difficulty whatever in passing the river and communications so well established that a corps of 7,000 men join the french about Jan 4. 1811. after very hard rain.x 21000 men coming in three divisions. z The affair of the Zizare compleatly given up and communications acknowledged, at the end of December. oSolt within 3 leagues.
Jan 1811 It is supposed the french will drive us back to Sobral

Gell taccuino 6 pag 157

Pen and ink drawing with watercolour: interior of church with worshippers
PATRIARCHAL : CHURCH : & : CHAPEL : ROYAL : AJUDA : BELEM.

Song
Hum corpo sem a metade
Que possa vivir não sei
Se tu es minha metade
Como sem ti vivirei

Margin:
Song Modinha
Amar para ser amada
He doce consolacão
Eu gozo toda esta dita
Que mais quer o meu coracão.
Que quer oh que quer
Gemir suspirar
Tremer palpitar
Que quer o meu Coracão. 
2
Imperios ricos thesauros
Não me moven ambicião
Sei que amo e sou amado
Que mais quer o meu coracão
3
Se a minha alma d’outra alma
Goza a fina adoracão
Se a vida toda he praze
Que mais quer o meu coracão.

[Line of music with lyrics]
amar para ser amada he doce consolacao Eu gozo toda esta dita que mais quer o meu coracao Que quer o que quer gemer suspi[rar]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 158

49
Pen and ink drawing: view of Alcântara valley
view into the valley of Alcantara from the garden of the Necessidades. Jan 1811 – 
Ajuda

REPORTS CONTINUED ON GOOD AUTHORITY.

[Symbols] Jan 20 when the french get all their reinforcements, we shall exceed them as we have above 100000 men.
We have 14000 English & Portuguese under M.B. on the south bank of the Tagus and 8000 Spaniards.
They have 1900 waggons in train we are to take them
Genl Carol Siege of Cadiz raised by the french Jan 15
Jan 17 Date of a letter from Cadiz no movement of the french.
Decr No fear of the french in Alentejo –
Jan 19 Inhabitants of Setuval removed to Lisbon for fear of French
The french		Romana dies & we go to bury him at Belem.
Jany 21. 1811 Junot wounded in the face in a skirmish in which the whole of our advanced poste were driven in.
Junot Killed by the English + – Account of Jan 25 1811
+ Junot very little hurt Jan 26
I went with Capt Beresford with whom I came to Lisbon in the Poictiers to Zapateiro to see his Brother Sir Wm. Beresford in the lines. We went in a Calesh. Bad road. Zapateiro a country house by a road side. The Troops very seldom seen. Next morning the General lent us horses. Mine was a strong black called John Bull. We rode to a wickerwork fort & found Ld. Wellington. He seeing me without uniform took me entirely under his protection & walked me away from the company. Shewed me Junots Camp in the distance. Asked me what They said in England of the army. I said we were told we should meet it coming back half way over the bay of Biscay. He quickly said “Then why did you come. I said because it was said you meant to fight & I was sure if you did you would conquer. He was quite pleased at this. It was at the time Cobbet was trying to write him down. He said that he could stand the french if they came with no more than 100000 men & that they could not provision more possibly. That it was said Buonaparte was coming. He would rather have 10000 men more against him as Bonaparte could sacrifice the 10000 without a word being said against him. He wished the french would attack him but he could not attack them without being certain of Victory & little loss, because not only he but the whole government at home would be destroyed by the least false step whereas Buonaparte feared no opposition & was unacountable to any one. Fearful odds for Ld Wellington to contend against. He desired me to go to a certain bridge in the valley below – When there said he look about you & see how many guns are pointed at you. Tis only over that the enemy can come & I wish he would try it. I went & found it as he said. He came & dined at Genl Beresfords & so did Romana & they were both very agreeable. We lived like people in the country & rode out to each others houses to dinner. I rode Count Lemos horse back to Lisbon & Mr Lemos took our Calesh.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 159

48
Jany 1811
Pen and ink drawing: view of Lisbon
garden of Austrian minister.	Rua Sssma Trinidade Lisboa

The ladies played at a game called the Saints. The company took different names as St Antoão St Ursula &c. Each had a veil one of the ladies went round and lifting up the veil asked who would buy such a saint describing him or her & her qualities in a ludicrous way. whoever laughed paid forfeit and stood up to sell the saints.

Margin:
The impudent attempt frequently printed to make Latin & Portuguese the same
Canto tuas palmas famosos canto triumphos
Ursula divinos martyr concede favores
Subjectas sacra nympha feros animosa tirannos
Tu phoenix vivendo ardes ardendo triumphos
Illustres generosa choros ‘das Ursula, bellas
Das rosa bella rosas fortes das sancta columnas
Æternas vivas annos o regia planta
Devoto cantando hymnos, vos invoco sanctas
Tam puras nymphas amo adoro canto celebro
Per vos felices annos o candida turba.
Per vos innumeros de Christo spero favores.

In Cathedral of Granada are carvings.
Abdallah delivering Keys of City to Ferdinand.
Moors with hands tied going into exile
Moors male & female baptized. Costumes perfect.
In Cathedral Tomb of Ferdinand & Isabella of marble

Gell taccuino 6 pag 160

47
Valeroso Hijodalgo
Muy bien se muestra en tu virtud la nobleza de tu sangre. Leida la carta hize tocar trompetas y añafiles en regozijo de tu convite y se convino entre todas las donzellas de mi linage, que gozosas iremos con tigo al sarao dispuesto por el noble Caballero que da las Fiestas y Zambras
Ala te embio bonanza y queda con el. No mas
De la Alhambra
Daraxa
Pariente del Rey Chico de Granada

Pen and ink drawing: puppet show
1810 Puppet Shew. Lisbon. Sunday Decr 30 1810

DUET Lisbon Jan 27 1811

Amor anda como hum gatto
Naõ lhe escapa boraquinho
Pilha aqui pilha acolà
Vai andando su caminho.

Amor entra pelos olhos
Vai ao petto dereitinho
Debalde a razaõ o chama
Vai andando seu caminho.

Dizem que o amor he cego
Mas naõ usa de caõzinho.
Encostado ao seu Arco
Vai andando &c.

O Amor he mui golozo
Gosta muito de docinho
Vai comendo vai gostando
Vai andando &c.

Amor quando quer entrar
Entra de seu capotinho
Vai crescendo estende a Capa
Vai andando &c.

Amor dentro de meu peito
Nunca pode fazer ninho
Logo apenas a mim chega
Vai andando &c.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 161

46
Passa lá por minha rua
E faz mizura ao Vizinho
Faço-lhe hum Ptishu, naõ me ouve,
Vai andando &c &c &c.

[Music with lyrics]
Amor anda com hum gatto. Nao-lhe escapa boraquinho.. Pilha acqui.. pilha acola… Vai andando seu caminho. Pilha acqui. pilha acola.. a … Vai andando seu caminho

Modinha
Mude mude de Sistema
Que esse proceder he feio
Nem use dessas palabras
Que tal, que sim, que foi, que veio
2
O fale claro o não fale
Tudo omais he puro entero
Que eu não quero mais ouvir
Que tal que sim q foi q veio
3
Os rapazes desta epoca
Quando tem algum receio
Esta Retorica sabem
Que tal q sim q foi q veio
4
Curese dessa mania
Fuja fuja desse enleio
Que em barulhos so se entende
Que tal qu –

Margin:
p166, 3 Vol
El Rey Muhamad de Granada 1375
En el tiempo de estas paces a 20 de Muharram del año setecientos 777 mandó el Rey Muhamad edificar la casa de Azake para recogimiento de pobres y alivio de sus enfermidades: acabó a 20 de Xewal año 798, edificio magnifico con todas las comodidades que sabe proporcionar la sabia arquitectura y la riqueza de un generoso principe con fuentes y espacios estanques de pulidos marmoles para recreo de los melancolicos. Tambien hermoseó con edificios la ciudad de Guadix a donde pasaba una buena temporada cado año. Durante la larga paz que tenia con todos los principes vecinos, fomentò las artes y manufacturas el comercio y la agricultura, y venian a Granada traficantes de todas la partes de Syria Egipto Africa Italia y Almeria: era la escala celebre de España
pretty stopping in Spain
Andaban en Granada gentes de diversas naciones asi Muslimes como Xtianos y Judios, y parecia la patria comun de todas las naciones. Poco despues vino a traer la esposa el Principe de Fez, y se casó en Granada con la hermosa Zahira hija de Abu Abdala Juzef que fue muy celebrada

Gell taccuino 6 pag 162

45
At Seville the Alcazar yet a Royal palace. Some is Moorish some of Carlos V. the Lonja or exchange part of it – Palace of Dukes of Alcala fine moorish. Medina Celi all the same.
Triana the Suburb S, of river. Walls almost entire. Many hermandades & confradias – Tricles with the river.
Cortijos scattered, Cazalla, Constantina Aracena places for Summer retreat in Sierra Morena.

Pen and ink drawing: shield
Aben – Alhamar
Sometimes red blue & green shields

Aben Alhamar King of Granada. Tomò por armas escudo campo de plata banda diagonal azul, y en ella escrito in letras de oro “le galib ile Ala” “no es vencedor sino Dios.” porque sus pueblos le solian saludar con el titulo de Galib y el replicaba “Wa le galib ile Ala.” y no hay mas vencedor que Ala.” las estremos de la banda del escudo en bocas de dragones. His descendant bore same arms only varying the colors, to red blue & green shields & changed color of band also. He began the Alhambra, directed the work y andaba entre los alarifes y arquitectos muchas veces. The Court:
Abu Meruan Abdelmelic Juzef ben Senanid ilustre natural de Jaen primer Wazir.
2d. Wazir. Aly ben Ibrahim Asaibani Azadi. de Granada, muy noble y rico.
Capitan della Guardia Muhamad hijo del Wazir Aly – he was also Alcayde.
Wali o principal Caudillo de sus tropas Abu Abdala Muhamad Arramim.
Almirante o caudillo del mar el padre de este.
Aben Muza Alcayde de su caballeria
Secretario de su Mezuar o consejo Yahye ben Alcatib de Granada.
Alcatibes o secretarios para ordenes y cartas. Abul Hasan Aly Arrayni 1
2 Abu Becar ben Chatab. 3 Abu Omar Juzef ben Said Alyahsi di Loxa.
7 Alcadies o jueces de corte. Abu Amer Yahye Alaschari. 2 Abu Abdala Muhamad Alansari celebre jurisconsulto who wrote many works.
3 Cadi de lo criminal, Abu Abdala el Tamini de los Asalamies de Loxa.
4 Aben Ayadh ben Muza el Yahsabi. 5 Aben Adha. 6 Abul Casem Abdala ben Abi Amer. 7 Aben Fat baron de Sevilla –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 163

44
Pen and ink drawing: street scene
Rua da conceptiao
Rua nova de almada
Rua Nova d Almada	Rua da Conceptião

Gell taccuino 6 pag 164

43
Pen and ink drawing: towers
El Mirab	Torre de Comares
Bosque del Alhambra
ALHAMBRA

Gell taccuino 6 pag 165

42
Abulcacim Tarif says
In year 91 of Hegira Don Rodrigo .A.D712. Jacob Almançor or Miramamolin Abilgualit Jacob Almancor at same time

Anagilda = Kg Acosta
Retired to Cordoba To Tanjer & thence to Africa & died with her son
D. Sancho

K Rodrigo
sent to Ataulpho to imprison Sancho in the Torre de la piedra in the Sierra Morena near Cordova. Anagilda delivers him & puts off Ataulphos nose & ears. Rodrigo destroyd all the Castles of the nobility in Andalusia & Castille.
= Zahra Abnalyaca d of a Moorish African King who was during a trip to sea driven by the wind to Cabo di Gata & made prisoner. Became a Xtian & Her father died of it. She was taken by Tarif & well treated. Mahomet Gilhair had the care of her & made love to her he turned Xtian for her & was by the Moors beheaded.

Don Julian Ld of Algeciras was sent to the Viceroy Muça el Zahani
Almancors title Rey de las Arabias.
Don Julians daughter ravished by Dn Rodrigo at Toledo. Florinda her name in Arabic La Caba a bad name. Don Julian the ambassador at Mucas court returns to Toledo takes away his Daughter & with all his moveable & tenants flies to Musas court who recd him well & sends him to Arabia to the Miramamolin Almancor who agrees to attack Spain & Julian goes with Tarif Abenziet of Damascus with 6000 infantry & a few cavalry. Lands at Jabalfeth Sierra della conquista

In 1390 the Cortes fixed for Henry II fixed 4000 men in garrison & 1,500 horsemen
In 1406 Henry 2d of Castille wishing to attack the King of Granada wanted 4 000 horse 10 000 lances & 50 000 infantry, with a fleet of 30 galleys & 50 ships. 6 great cannons. 12 iron rams. 6000 waggons.

Margin:
Don Rodrigo enters the enchanted Tower one mile east of Toledo in a rocky place a fine old edifice, but degraded by time. under this was a cave, de bobeda. very narrow with a door cut in rock & a strong iron gate over this in Greek letters The king who opens this cave & discovers its marvels shall see good & bad things”. King Rodrigo entered with some friends who fled but the Kg got many lights. In a quadra muy hermosa like a sumptuous edifice he saw a statue of bronze of great size on a pillar 3 cubits high. This figure with a great club beat the ground & caused a horrid sound. The King told this vision he did not come to destroy anything but only to see its marvels on which the statue ceased the blows. The King & his companions then examined the quadra & found at the left of the statue written. Oh unhappy King to your own loss have you entered here”. on the Right “By foreign nations shalt thou be dispossessed & thy country chastised.” On the shoulder of the statue “I envoke the Arabs” on the breast. “I do my office” – At the entry of the hall was a bola redonda whence a noise like a water fall. On the Kgs departure the statue recommenced the noise & the King orderd a heap of earth to be thrown up against the door.
Ataulpho went against Tarif with 30 000 men & 500 horse
Ataulpho conquered. Then Rodrigo sent an Archbishop Don Orpas with 30 000 men & 3000 horses.
Tarif by degrees got 60 000 men & 10000 cavalry.
Orpas was beat. Rodrigo then came with 23 000 cavalry & 13000 infantry. Ramiro the ensign fell dead.
Rodrigo in 8 battles lost all & fled & Tarif took Cordova.
Some moors found a Shepherd in D Rodrigos clothes & took him he had changed with the King.
Tarif passed thence to Granada without opposition
They found a small city on a height very pleasant & delightful vale below it thro which ran a very pretty river. The surrounding mountains full of trees & frescuras. a Paradise on earth. The city soon given up to him. on conditions of peaceable nature. Betiz Abenhabuz of Arabia felix made governor. Tarif then went against the Mts de Sol y Ayre where he had great dificulties. Captain Abrahem Abuxarra at length subdued them & their Bishop Otogerio. Then Carmona & Merida.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 166

41
At MALAGA an arabian palace the Alcacaba now the new custom house. In castle a sort of chimney over every window & door running up to battlements to throw stones down. Gibralfaro.
Santa Fé 2 leagues from Granada
Earthquake in 1809. Church cut in 2.
Muley Hasen peak 12 762 feet from sea. Picacho de Veleta 12 459.
general run 1824 & 1781 fathoms
Mt Perdu top of Spanish Pyrenees 1763 fathoms. Muleyhasen 1824. 76 fathoms lower than Teneriffe.
Sierra de Gador near Almeria 7.800 feet.
Rock of Filabres 2 000 feet high. 4 miles round. Almeria taken 1147 by Alfonso & a fleet of Genoese. Garnets near Capo di Gata. Near T de las Guardas is jasper near T. de White carnelian Neste.
Precious stones in cavern of Bujo.
In puerto de la plata Moorish corsairs. near it in rock el monte de las guardas amethysts. Alpuxarras lie between Sierras Nevada & de Gador.
At Concud human bones &c. Soto di Roma Mr Wall. 4000 acres of forest. Pheasants.  died in 1778. wento Godoy. road from Sa Fe to a venta on rio Saladillo from salt springs of Almaha. Loxa & its moorish castle in pass 9000 souls. Chiuma has 8000 souls. river Guadalhorce.
A french Knight & Moorish princess fled from Granada to pena de los enamorados, by tradition.
Antiquera Anticaria 8000 families 40000 souls, taken 80 years before Granada by Juan II. In Moorish castle which is very perfect is armour. short javelins. Xbows oval shields

Margin:
Antequera
made of two hides musket proof. The entry called the giants arch. Mosque perfect. fountains. Fuente de la Piedra.
FONTI DIVINO ARAM L. POSTUMIUS STATULIUS EX VOTO .D.D.D.
Alora 4 leagues from Antequera 4 000 souls.
[Drawing: arch] arabs of Syria of the Ommiades.
house of Abbas used [drawing: arch] ???
Ronda 20000 souls. encircled by Guadiaro connected with country by an [drawing: arch bridge] 120 feet high 2d [drawing:arch bridge] 280 feet arch 110 feet diam?
Alameda has a precipice of 500 feet
all the rivers of Ronda fall into the cueva del Gato. a mile through which is a lake with ruins of antiquity. beyond this deep lake passage of water too small to penetrate 4 miles from cave the river again comes out & runs by Algaucin. Civil people.
Algaucin 10 000 souls.

Drum of Almansor.
[Arabic]
Almansar Khasara Tabluhu fi Calcanassar
Drums invented by Arabs

This is called so by Spaniards but it was Kalat Anesor vide Conde Chap CII p 543 Vol I.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 167

40
100 000 Moors condemned by inquisition 4 000 burnt. Philip III in 1609 banished 140 000 from Valencia & after 3 years 600 000 from Murcia Seville & Granada. 400 000 families says count Campomanes or at least one million.
Before this 800 000 Jews in time of Ferdinand & Isabella.
Fonseca writes “justa expulcion de los Moriscos. 257 page Spain Vid.
The tricks of sacrificing one child to Baptism & lending it to other families for the same purpose.
Vide p258 Apen Humeyas letter apostolic.
In 1726 the inquisition seized 360 families of Mahometans, their goods 12 000 000 crowns.
in 1787 the Quemadero or burning place of Granada neglected. but 8 years before 2 Jews & a Turk burned.
Silk in 1726. 2. 600 000 lbs. in 1776 only 100 000
Sugar motril to Marbella. canes 9 ft high
A village up the darro or Douro Moorish round plump faces bright eyes small nose & underjaws good people.
In Granada out of 652990 souls 1979 nobles or hidalgos.
Alhama – Alhama or La Mala the royal salt springs in way. 2000 souls. runs to el saladillo. Thence 4 hours to Alhama, city only accessible from west where a castle. 1 500 families. Moors had a revenue of 500 000 ducats from letting Xtians bathe.
Alhama to Lamala 20 miles. only one small village on road.
8 Leagues to La Venuela. an hour beyond La Venuela Velez Malaga 7000 souls.
[Drawing: drum]

Margin:
Malaga 75 000 souls.
Velez beautiful

Foreign review Nov. 1828 says
Moors had no knowledge of classics therefore all their poetry new. all in vulgar tongue. even science in verse & algebra. The rest of Europe wrote then in latin. Many Xtians in Spain wrote in Arabic, many of their books yet at Toledo & Escurial. The clergy menaced Xtians for this. Also Moors wrote a code of Arab laws in Spanish & a book of agriculture. A Spanish MS. in Arab letters mentiond by M. de Sacy.
When Calcanasor was taken by Moors in 998. a ghost as a fisherman on the banks of the Guadalquivir sung in a loud & mournful voice “Almanser has lost his drum at Calcanasor”. he sung alternately in Arabic & Spanish & then vanishd.
First real Spanish poetry Galician where no Moor. Gonzalo Hermiguez to Ourouana his wife –
Many Spanish histories of 12th century.
Ferdinand & his Son Alonzo the wise translated code of Goths into Spanish & used Spanish in every thing.
But Alphonso read arabic deeply, but ordered that all useful works should be translated into Spanish.
The Limousin tongue, says Raymond Vidal an old Troubador was the 3d & principal tongue of Spain used in Guienne & Provence Catalonia Valencia & Islands. Antonio Ruffi historian of Marseilles says tounge of that city changed in 12 century by Catalonian words. [O with X through]
Calat Anosor
[Arabic]
in Calcanasor in his drum has lost El manser
Al or Elmanser Khasara Tablahu fi Calcanasor.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 168

39
[O with X through]
Ergo the Troubadours came first from Catalonia, Pittoni in history of Aix says “Ce fut sous eux que nous Provençaux trouverent l’art de rimer”. Hence Toulouse under the Berengers metropolis of Troubadours.
Abderramen King of Cordova invaded Toulouse in 8th century. Then Charlemagne invaded Spain.
Alphonso 6th of Castile conqueror of Toledo being dethroned by his brother Sancho fled to the Saracen King of Toledo. & remained 3 years, recovering his throne he took Toledo from the son of his benefactor, a siege of 5 years, The Moors by stipulation remained at Toledo under the Xtians with laws property & grand mosque. & Arabic for more than 100 years the tongue. Some years later Alfonso defeated at Medina by Kings of Cordova & Seville, he made peace marrying Zaïde daughter of the Moorish King of Seville.
Toledo taken in 1085, here Moors French & Spanish lived together. Wm of Poictiers first of Troubadours known went with Alphonso against Toledo.
Homer unknown from 4th to 14th century. Among Chas. Vths library at the Louvre 900 Vols only Ovid Lucan & Boëthius.
Sonnet in form & alternate rhymes all Moorish
Times of Chivalry says Sismondy never existed but in Romance.
Berengere wife of Alfonso VIII of Castile came on walls of Toledo against the besieging moors in 1139 called them cowards & dared them to leave a woman quiet & go & meet the King at Oreja. The Moors did so, lauding her beauty & virtue
In 10 century the monk Gerbert alias pope Sylvester II studied at Moorish college at Seville. so after did Adelard, Gerard of Cremona &c.
Frederic Barbarossa had Arabic books turned into Latin.

Margin:
Petrarch says Arabs invented rhyme.
15th century only Pico of Mirandola studied Arabic.
Clenard a few years after went to Spain to learn arabic & only found one person Ferdinand Nuntius who knew it a little.
Pope Gregory destroyed Livy. Cardinal Ximenes burned 5,000 fine volumes. One Zegri a converted Moor burn’t 150,000 volumes though converted by force.
When Philip 2d founded Library of Escurial he could only get 300 Arabic M.S.S.
The great stock afterwards added were taken by de Lara off Salee in 1611 in 2 moorish ships bearing the library of the Emp: of Morocco. There were 3,000 arab M.S.S. some said 7,800 as a Moor said. Half this burnt at a fire of Escurial in 1671. The moorish literature not quite forgotten in Spain but the first work printed in Arab letters there 1760-70 Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, by Casiri.
Koran printed at Venice 1530 probably burnt by Clement VII because no confutation
About 50 years later Arab press in Maronite convent at Rome.
English monk Adelard turned Euclid from Arabic to Latin.
Robt. of Rutland translated Koran in 12th century.
De Sacy Crestomathie Arabe good new work. 3 Vols 8oo. c
SIERRA NEVADA
Pa de Veleta 3794	Muleyhassan 3886 yards
				3
				11,658
Sierra Tejada 2 557

Gell taccuino 6 pag 169

38
SPAIN
Temp. Philip 2d. he was very poor yet 58 Archbishops. 684 Bishops. 11 400 abbots. 936 chapters. 127 000 parishes. 7,000 hospitals. 23,000 fraternities. 46,000 monasteries. 135 000 convents. 312 000 secular priests. 200 000 inferior ecclesiastics. 400 000 monks & nuns. & whole population 10.500000. at least 400 000 Moors banished by Philip III.
Philip IIs revenue 30 000 000 of ducats – not half had his Successor, whose public debt exceeded 100. Charles II had only 7 or 8 000 000 of francs. Philip V only 7,500000 souls Charles III had 11 000 000 souls. From beginning of Ferdinands reign to end of next reign revenue had increased from 26,000000 to 60 … … of crowns

Conde Vol 2 p108 says
el Rey Alfonso de Galicia ufano y evanecido de sus victorias y de la conquista de Toledo cabeza de España y casa principal de los Reyes Godos having a secret understanding with Abed of Sevilla. Aben Abed Almutamad was king of Seville
Alfonso had already made tributary Yahye Alcadir de Valencia. Alfonso wrote to Aben Abed that he would have certain places & Castles by force.
Alfonso wrote this, “Del Emperador y señor de las dos leyes y naciones, el excelente y poderoso Rey D. Alfonso ben Sancho al Rey Almutemed bila Aben Abed, que Dios fortifique y alumbre su entendimiento para que se determine a seguir el verdadero camino que os conviene. salud y Buena voluntad de

Margin:
parte de un Rey engrandecedor de reynos y amparador de pueblos, al cual han encanecido los cabellos en el conocimiento y prudencia de las cosas y en el ejercicio y destreza de las armas, y en perpetua consecucion de victorias en cuya casa nació la consecution de sus deseos y el cumplimiento de su voluntad en cuyas banderas esta de asiento la Victoria

Goths entered Spain 409. beat Romans & natives Goths King married daur of Emp. Theodosius. Natives retired to Galicia. 418 Vandals. 456 Theodoric the Goth beat king of Suevi. Euric son of Theodc went from Pyrenees to Rhone but Clovis retook this from Alaric son of Euric.
624 Kg Suintilla Kg of whole Peninsula.
Ceuta resisted moors. Count Julian its Governor. Musa could not take it. Kg Witizas  Sister Julians wife.
712 Taric defeats Roderic at Xeres. Palagius retires to Asturias.
Goths Arians first.

Under Tarik. Royal Legion of Damascus at Cordova.
Legion of Emesa at Seville
    • of Kinnisrin or Calchis at Jaen
    • of Palestine at Algeziras & Medina Sidonia
    • of Yemen & Persia at Toledo
    • Egypt in Murcia & Lisbon
    • of cavalry of Irak & Syria at Granada. These were 10 000 of the most noble Arabs & Syrians.

Spain under Viceroy of Caliphs till Ommiades fell. When one of them came to Spain x was Caliph Abdalrahman. He beat the Abbassides & reigned at Cordova. This race lasted abt 250 years. Then split into Kingdoms.

Pelagius founded Km. of Leon. beat Moors 718.
881 Alphonso took Coimbra. Ramirus 2d Madrid & almost Toledo. Vide p17

Gell taccuino 6 pag 170

37
Conde Dominación de Los Arabes en España
El Rey Don Alfonso el Sabio ordeno en el año 1254 en Sevilla estudios de Latin y. Arabigo. En tiempo de Felipe III fu presa una nave en que iba la libereria de Muley Zidan Principe de Marruecos. ma. en 1671 un incendio consumia en El Escorial mas de ocho mil volumenes, la mayor parte arabigos.
Arabs at conquest of Spain gave el libre egercicio de su religion la conservacion de sus templos y la seguridad de sus personas, bienes y posesiones. Y la fidelidad de estos en guardar sus pactos y mantener justicia igual con todos las clases sin distincion alguna ganaba la confianza de los pueblos &.. Y en estas prendas generoso animo y hospitalidad eran estremados los Arabes de aquellos tiempos.
Isidoro de Beja (el Cronicon de) es el unico contemporaneo a la venida de los Arabigos. Hasta el año 7mo de Jucef el Fehri 745 J.C.
Sebastiano Salmanticense Cronica 886 J.C.
Cronicon Abeldense que añadiò el monge Vigila 973.
Cronicon de Sampiro Asturiense 982
Pelagio Ovetense 1109.
Anales Complutenses 1119 – In Era MCXXIV die 6. X Kal Novembris die SS. Servandi et Germani, fuit illa arrancada in Baduzo. id est Sacralias et fuit ruptus Rex domnus Adefonsus.
los Compostelanos 1248 – says. Era MCXXIV fuit illa die Badajoz
Toledanos 1290 – Era 1124 arrancaron Moros al Rey don Alonzo en Zagalla.
De estos Cronicones y algunos escritos Arabigos formò Don Rui Ximenez Arzobispo de Toledo su historia de los Arabes: He spoke the Muzarabes tongue well. Ao 539 de los Arabes 1140 de J.C.
La historia que se dice del Moro Rasis, de los Cronicones antiguos con algunas noticias de malos libros arabigos: toda llena de errores y fabulas absurdas. But its geography good.

Margin:
Iza ben Ahmed Razif a real Author.
really wrote a history on which many fables engrafted.
Cronica general de El Rey Don Alfonso el Sabio.
very good for that time. yet many fables
Cronicas particulares de Don Alonso el onceno.
History de Tarif Aben Taric por el Morisco Miguel de Luna impudente osadia literaria.
Varios autores de Hadices = tradicionales.
Hadgi Chalfa 1200 historiadores.
Aben Ishak Tabari
Aben Omar el Wakedi
el Mesaudi
Seif Alezdi
Aben Kelbi
Novairi.
Aben Regig o Rechic hista de Africa.
Aben Hayan de Espana el mejór, a los reynados de los Omeyas en Cordoba.
Arabs generally shortened history & geography & left only the skeleton.

Fez not founded till ao 192 Heg.
Arabic governors
Amires. Walies. Wacires. Cadies. Alcaydes. Xeques. Hagibes. Almucademes. Arrayaces.
Hours = hora de Azohbi = Alba – de Adoha = dia claro – de Adohar = mediodia. de alazar = media tarde. almagrib sunset, puesta del Sol
alatema o alaxa = al anochecer.
horas de sus oraciones o azalaes.
months Muharram Safer Rabie 1ma Rabie 2o
Giumada 1a. do 2a. Regeb. Xaban
Ramazan. Xawal. Dylcada. Dilhagia
never exceed 30 or less than 29 alternately.
epochs from foundation de la Caaba o casa cuadrada.
El Hegira principio 16 junio 622 de J.Xtus.

The Rey Alfonso called El Embalatur de los Xtianos Aladfuns & Adfuns.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 171

36
Conde Followed
Works of Abu Abdala Muhamad ben Abi Nasr el Homaidi de Cordova. Cronica de la conquista de España. Amires &c la serie de los Beni Omeyas, Reyes de Cordoba, y vidas de varones ilustres de España. 450 de Hegira continued by Ahmed ben Yahye ben Ahmed ben Omeira Edobi de Mallorca 560.
El Homaidi cita Abdelmelic ben Habib Zalemi, Abdala ben Junes, Abdala ben Wahib, Alaitz ben Saad y Abul Casem Abderahman ben Abdala ben Abdelhakem all writers of the oldest times. Es un tomo en folio escrito en papel moreno y grueso
Asimismo
Aben Alabar, el Codai Valenciano escritor muy docto y extractò mucho de Abu Meruan ben Hayan ben Chalif. Tambien de los anales de Abul Hassan ben Besam de Mocri abu Abdala ben Abdelaziz ben Saad Axati, y de Iza ben Ahmed ben Muhamad ben Muza el Razif, y de Muhamad Abu Becar ben Jucef ben Casem Xelbi en su historia de Aben Abed Rey de Sevilla.
Obra de Meraudi intitulada “Prados Aureos”. 327 de los Arabes y la expedicion de Abderraman III, talas y conquistas reciprocas de Zamora por las tropas del Rey de Cordoba y los Xtianos acaudillados por el Rey Radmir de Galicia. 327 hasta 336.
Abul Casem Chalaf ben Abdelmelic ben Bascual de Cordoba hasta el quinto siglo de la Hegira un tomo in folio.

Margin:
Epoch of the Almoravides y de los Almohades en la historia de Fez de Abdel Halim de Granada 726 – tomo en quarto en papel.
Lizan-Edin ben Alchatib Asalemani Secretario de los Reyes de Granada. called El Plenilunio de la dymnastia Nasrina en Granada: y 3 tomos en folio biograficas 2 Memorias 1.
Abdala Algiazami de Malaga wrote Granada y la historia de sus Reyes.
Ahmed Almaxarsi del Rey Jucef Abul Hagiag el augusto de Granada.  Y de la de los Beni Merinas in prose & verse by Ismail ben Jucef Amir de Malaga, intitulada “Olor de la rosa”.
Anales de Abulfeda, los de Xakiki y de Fesani
Anales de Aben Sohna.
Obra de Abu Teib de Ronda anecdotes of Princes & Arabs &c
Obra rara de Abdala Aly ben Abderahman ben Huzeil de Granada. expediciones sacras o guerras contra Christianos, de arte militar de hacer frontera, de ardides y estrategemas de guerra, armas, maquinas, y caballeria. es muy curioso en los usos y costumbres de los Arabes Españoles. Tomo in folio escrito en papel moreno y grueso, de harta antigüedad.
La mayor parte de estos M.S.S estan en la Bibliotheca Real publica en Madrid y en la Escorial 
At Paris in Royal library “Historia de Espana y su description por Ahmed el Mocri Almagrebi in Arabic.
Condes book. La primera trata de la entrada de los Arabes en Espana, y la sucesion de los Amires, o caudillos de la conquista dependientes de los Calyfas de Oriente. La 2a contiene el establecimiento de la monarquia de los Beni Omeyas y la sucesion de estos Reyes. La tercera comprende la guerra civil y division de los reynos en España: venida de los Almoravides y Almohades y la sucesion de estas dymnastias. Y la quarta es toda del reyno de Granada ultimo period de la dominacion Arabiga en España.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 172

35
Conde. La dominación de los Arabés
de los campos de Yemen. Islam = seguridad y resignation. unde Muslimes. Idolatrous antes Mahomad.
Saad ben Ahmed Cadi de la ciudad de Toledo decia que fueran 2 generaciones de Arabes in Arabia. One is extinct tribes of Ad, of Themud, Tesm y Jadis. Los que permanecen son dos castas de Cahtan y Adnan. el imperio estaba en la cabila o tribu de Cahtan. y la familia de los Reyes Homiares. Kings Lords y Tobeos. Campiñas di Irak o Caldea.
Homiar tribu adoraba el sol, Canenah a la Luna. Misam la estrella Aldebaran. Laham y Jedam, Jupiter Estrella. Tay la constellacion de Sohail. Kais la Ashera al Obur. Asad la de Mercurio. Tzaquif un tempillo Alat en las alturas de Nahla. Some believed in ye resurrection & some sacrificed a camel or horse on the tombs.
Mahomad naciò en Mecca ciudad del Hegiaz. there the Anct Temple Albaram to true God. founded by Ismael. Mahomad of tribe or Cabila de Coraix of great family. Conqueror at Honain at Bedrè & Ohod.
Adnan descendant of Ismael
Maad
Nazar
Modhar
Alyas
Modreca
Hozaimah
Kenanah
Alnadhr
Malec
Fehr
Galeb
Lova
Caab
Morra
Kelab
Rosa
Abdmenaf
Hasem
Abdelmotaleb X
Abdalah = Amina
Mahomad = Cadijah
Arabs counted from the epoch of the Ethiopic war or “la entrada del Señor del Alfil o del Elefante. In this Abdelmotaleb X defended his country & destroyed the army of the Ethiopian King. This war mentioned in the Koran. Jusuf ben Said of Illora writes about it also.
Medina Yatrib afterwards called Medinatalnabi = city of Prophet.
Mahomed born at dawn 8 of month Rebie primera on tuesday 622 after Xt.

Margin:
In year of Hegira 86. Ao Xt 705 died the Calif Abdelmelec. His son Walid ben Abdelmelic succeeded. He confirmed Muza ben Noseir in command of the troops in Africa, He & his son Abdelaziz conquered in Almagreb. beat the Moor tribes Masmuda. Zanhaga. Ketama & Hoara. Meruan son of Musa came to Tanja.
Certain Xtians of Gezira de Alandalus ofendida de su Rey Ruderic vinieron a Muza ben Noseir, y le incitaron a pasar con tropas a España. The channel or gut called Alzacac. El Rey Don Alfonso el Sabio made the chronicle of these times but la Caba the Donzella Alifa &c all Moorish fictions. The Calif applauded Muzas enterprise. Muza sent Taric ben Zeyad. He passed with quinientos caballeros Arabes en 4 barcos grandes ao 710. They took some places on the coast of Andalucia. & returned.
After this Taric landed with an army at Gezira Alhadra or Isla Verde. Taric beat the natives & fortified Gebal Taric Alfeth anciently. & burnt his Ships. Tadmir, Roderics captain there. He wrote to Roderic. Señor aqui han llegado gentes enemigas de la parte de Africa. yo no se si del cielo u de la tierra: yo me halle acometido de ellos de improviso: resisti con todas mis fuerzas para defender la entrada: pero me fue forzoso cedar a la muchedumbre y al impetu suyo, ahora a mi pesar acampan en nuestra tierra: ruegoos Señor, pues tanto os cumple que vengais a socorrernos con la mayor diligencia. y con cuanta gente se pueda allegar: venid vos Senor en persona que sera lo mejor.”
He sent a fine body of cavalry Gothic who skirmished always with loss. The Muslimes commanded by Mugueiz el Rumi.
Roderic raised the whole country & came to

Gell taccuino 6 pag 173

34
Sidonia with 90 000 men. The hosts met on a Sunday on banks of the Guadalede 2 days before Ramazan. Temblaba debajo de sus pies la tierra y se estremecia, y resonaba el ayre con el estruendo de los atambores y añafires y con el sonido di guerreras trompas, y con el espantoso alarido de ambas huestes. 4 Xtians to 1 Turk The night separated the armies. Next day the same. Taric on 3d day saw the Moors ready to yield so cried G’uala & attacked & killed King Ruderic. & the rest fled. The place covered with bones long after. Taric sent Roderics head to Muza. Muza left Africa or Cairvan to Abdelaziz his son & brought over 8,000 foot & 10 000 horse. His sons Abdelola & Meruan came also, the last gave his name to a palace on the river West of Cordova. Came also Arabs of tribe Coraix. also Almonazir, Aly ben Rebie Lahmi, Hayut ben Reja Tamani, Hanas ben Abdala Asenani, que despues fue la grande Aljama de Saracusta. Taria proceeded in spite of Muza & made good regulations for sparing the natives when they submitted. Mugueiz el Rumi went to Cordova. Zayde ben Kesadi el Sekseki to Malaga. The third body Taric took by Jayen to Tolaitola or Toledo the capital. Kesadi joined on the road having conquered the people of Estija. Malaga & Elvira yielded.
Spali Esbilia = Sevilla. Mugueiz took Cordoba. Taric at Tolaitola which Capitulated. Those who fled lost their goods, those who staid kept all only paying tribute. Churches & religion spared only no more to be built without licence. Taric lived in the alcazar del Rey. in a room 25 crowns of gold garnished with hyacinths & other stones. ie one crown for each of 25 Gothic Kings who had reigned.
Muza went by Esbilia & took it by convention. left Abdila el Towail de Medina governor. Thence to Carmuna which yielded. he had 18 000 horse few foot. went into Algarbe or Lusitania & took Libla, Ossonoba,

Margin:
Myrtilis Beja &c & came to Merida a magnift city with high towered walls.
Besieged it sent for his Son Abdelaziz with fresh troops. Citizens skirmished with loss. Ambuscade by Musa in a deep glen. He takes a tower is driven from it called from the deaths Borg Axuhuda = Torre de los Martires.
Abdelaziz came with 7,000 horse & ballesteria grande de los Berberies. The city yielded. Those who came to the camp saw his long white beard one day, it was red black the next. it alarmed them. Found at Merida Roderics Queen.
Taric from Tolaitola took a city tras los montes & gave it his name. Then Guadilhigiara its river & mount. & a Valley Feg Taric. Medina Almeida la mesa de Suleiman because a mesa garnished with emeralds & jacinths found there. Next Medina Maya where much booty & returned to Toledo. Seville rebelled & killed 30 Moors. Abdelaziz sent & took it & chastised it. The Roman bridges of Tagus & Guadiana they admired much & called Ionian. At Talbera Medina Taric came to meet Musa the Wali & appeased him by jewels & spoil & so they went to Toledo. There in the Alcacar Musa asked for the “mesa de Suleyman. It wanted one foot Taric said he had found it so. Musa discharged him for disobedience, to his Wali, in the name of the Calif.
Abdelaziz conquers Tadmir & its Gothic King in Murcia. Tadmir ben Gobdos. At Lorca Xns defeated in a great battle. Xtians fled to Auriola. The Xn women mounted guard as men & tied their hair under chins to sham beards. Moors taken in. Capitulation. “En nombre de Dios clemente y misericordioso Abdelaziz y Tadmir hacen este convenio de paz que Dios confirme y proteja: que Tadmir haya el mando de sus gentes, y no otro de los Xtianos de su reyno que no habra entre ellos guerra ni se les tomaran cautivos sus hijos ni mugeres: que no serán molestados sobre su religion, ni se les incendiarán sus iglesias, sin otros servicios ni obligaciones que las aqui convenidas: que esta avenencia se entienda tambien sobre siete ciudades, Auriola Valentila, Lecant. Mula. Boscara. Ota y Lorca. que 

Gell taccuino 6 pag 174

33
el no recibira nuestros enemigos ni nos faltarà a la fidelidad, ni ocultarà trato hostil que entienda: que el y sus nobles pagarán el servicio di un dinar o aureo cade año, y cuatro medidas de trigo, y cuatro de cebada, y cuatro de mosto, y cuatro de vinagre, y cuatro de miel, y cuatro de aceite; y los siervos o pecheros la mitad de esto, Fue escrita en cuatro de Regeb, año noventa y cuatro de la Hegira. Testificaron sobre esto Otzman ben Abi Abda, Habib ben Abi Obeida, Edris ben Maicera, y Abulcasim el Mezeli. The messenger who went to make this accord was Tadmir himself. The Moors entering the city next day asked where was the garrison Tadmir told them Women.
Abdelaziz next took Sierras de Segura, Bazta, Acxi, Jayen, Elvira y en Garnata, que tenian los Judios y en Anticaria y Malaga y otras ciudades de la costa del mar.
Tadmir ben Gobdas King of Eastn Andalucia.
The Calif sent Muza to restore Taric. Taric & Muza both went against East Spain ordering again prohibition de robos y pillage con pena de la vida.
Taric went to founts of Tagus. Arcabica sierras. Molina y Segoncia, y las vegas y campos que riega el Ebro. Muza to Sentica & Salamanca Astorica & then along the Duero to the east, to Medina Saracusta then besieged by Taric. Muza ben Noseir took a great fine & left governor Hanax ben Abdala Asenani who built a Mezquita y una principal Aljama.
They took Wesca, Turiazona, Calagurra, Ilerda, Tarragona up to mts Anfranc. Taric took Tortuxa, Murbiter, Valencia, Xativa y Denia. Islam at Barciluna, Gerunda y Empuria & also into land of Afranc & took Medina Narbona

Margin:
where fine 7 idol equestrian of silver in a temple. Then to Guf & to Galicia por Asturica y en Lugidania. The Calif had a fifth of spoil. They plundred & quarrelled so the Calif ordred both Muza & Taric to Damascus. Muza left his son Abdelaziz Governor of Spain. Amir.
Muza went to Damascus with great riches & 400 Varones de las familias regias godas who wore on their heads diademas de oro. & golden belts. entrò en Syria 95 of Hegira.
The Calif Walid received him well I mean Taric
Fostat near Cairo = a Tent. Alguf = north. Alquibla = S. Axarkia = E. Algarbe West.
Mechtisebes; treasures of provinces
The Calif ordered the death of Muzas sons in Spain. Poor Abdelaziz was at an Alqueria cerca Sevilla que se llamaba Kenisa Rebina where he built a Mosque. El Wali his Title His muger goda Ayela favorecia mucho a los Xtianos. Zeyad ben Nabigat el Temimi got him slain head cut off & body buried en el patio. 97 of Hegira Tadmir sent & got protection from the Calif.
Ayub was elected Wali brother of Abdelaziz he moved from Sevilla to Cordoba.
The Governor of Zaragoza Hanax ben Abdala ben Amru ben Hantala ben Fehid ben Kenan ben Thalbe ben Abdala ben Thamir Asafei el Senani conquistador de Egipto Africa Almagreb e de España companero de Muza ben Noseir. He built the great Mosque & Calat-Ayub. The embalmed head of Abdelaziz carried to Suleiman the Calif, when Muza visited him his sons head shewn. o Muza conoces esta cabeza. si bien la conozco, la maledicion de Dios sea sobre quien asesinó a quien era mejor que el. y se salió del palacio lleno de dolor y fallecio de gran melancolia. This Calif built the great Mosque of Damascus, with 600 lamps hanging from gold chains. cost 40 chests of 14000 doblas each. Calif Omar charged them. much smoke.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 175

32
Calif Omar ben Abdelaziz succeeded Suleiman he ordered Aly not to be cursed in pulpits.
He deposed Ayub as a son of Muza & made Amir of Spain Alhaur ben Abderahman el Caisi. Ayub only governed but well 7 months. Alhaur el Amir went with an army into Galia Narbonense que es Tierra de Afranc a cruel man. Gibal Albortat = the Pyrenees. from latin portas. Jezid was next Calif Ahaur deposed for cruelty 103. Hegira. next Wali was Alsama ben Melic el Chulani, he got to Carcaxona y Tolosa (Thoulouse). The Señor de Alfranc here opposed him & beat & killed him. Moors retired Ambisa ben Sohim who had been left lieutenant sent reinforcements. Abderahman ben Abdala el Gafeki made Amir
The Calif Jezid died for love of Hebaba who was dead. he kept her to look at & at last buried her then had her dug up again & died in a few days. aged 33 years or 29. Hixem ben Abdelmelic next Calif 105 Hegira. Abderahman was deposed & Ambisa became Amir but the deposed Amir remained his friend. Ambisa rebuilt the bridge of Cordova visited the provinces & gave Xts & Muslimes equal justice.
In this time Jews of France & Spain many & rich heard Zonaria their messiah was come & went to Syria leaving their goods. He got into France to the Rodans. Killed by wounds 106 Heg. 724 Xt.
He left Hodeira ben Abdala el Fehri who was changed for Yahye ben Zalema. the Basques in Alguf montes Albaskenses. changed for Otman ben Abi Neza Amir. Next Amir was Hodaifa ben Alhaus. nex Otman ben Abi Neza el Chemi. 109. These Emirs rapidly changed.
Albab in Mes Albortat = Puycerda
The Moors arrived at the Garuna. The King of Afranc was Caldus. (Carlos Martel). Mesaudi calls all French Kings Colorio & Lodorio the Spanish Lodron or Odron. Bordhal = Bordeaux.
Medina Towrs = Tours. Moors took it. Hosts met on banks of Owar (Loire). The Moors lost the battle & fly to Narbona Medina Abderahman being killed.
The moors get into France again under the Amir Abdelmelic ben Cotan 736 Xt. next Emir Ocba ben Alhegag. he established Cadis. Abdelmelic became Amir again but was delivered by his own people to Baleg & Thaalaba two new adventurers from Africa at 

Margin:
Cordova tied to a stake at end of bridge. They cut off his head. Abderahman ben Ocba came to revenge his father. already Thaalaba & Baleg had separated. The son of Ocba killed Baleg with his lance & his troops fled. Abderahman had the title of Almanzor from this Victory. 742ao. Hegira 125.
The Calif Walid ben Jezid impious drank wine abused power, entered lands of Mecca with hunting dogs made good verses & liked music. he was killed 126.
Iusuf el Fehri Amir de España 746. Amer made governor of Sevilla, he descended from Mosab alferez del Profeta en la batalla de Bedre. era muy poderoso y habia cōstruido un magnifico palacio en Cordoba fuera de sus muros a la parte del ponente de la ciudad y un espacioso cementerio. Lisbon = Alisbona. Portocale a city or port.
Loado seas Senor Dios, dueño de los imperios que das el señorio a quien quieres, y quitas el señorio a quien quieres, y honras a quien quieres y humillas a quien quieres en tu mano esta el bien y el mal y tu eres sobre todas las cosas poderoso. &. So begins the reign of the Calif Meruan. Forat the Euphrates.

Spain in time of Calif Meruan. under jusuf el Fehri.
Mando restituir los caminos militares de Andalucia a Tolaitola. a Merida, a Alisbona, a Asturica, y a Saracusta y Tarracona. Reparò los puentes deribabos las Aljamas & con la tercia parte de los productos di cada provincia. La primera provincia Andalucia antes Beitica del Beti rio de Cordoba desde su nascimiento. & Guadiana contiene Cordoba Esbilia, Carmona, Estija, Talica cerca de Esbilia antigua casa real de los Eparcos de España, Sidonia Arcos, Libla, Malaga, Elbira, jayen Arjona Castolona, Alturja, Cabra Bulcona (*Porcuna) Astaba Ossona, y otras. 2d Provincia de Tolaitola antes de Cartagena de las sierras de Guadaramla hasta las montañas del otro lado del Duero, contiene Tolaitola, Ubeda, Bayeza, Mentiza, Wadiacix. Basta, Murcia, Bocastra, Mula, Lorca, Auriola, Elixe, Xatiba, Denia, Lucante, Cartagena, Valencia, Valeria, Segovia, Segobrica Ercabica, Wadilhijara, Secunda, Oxima, Colounia, Cauca, Balancia y otras. 3 Provincia de Merida antes Lugidania y Galicia Algarbe hasta las costas que baña el mar Britanico – contiene Merida Beja, Baracara, Dumio, Alisbona, Portocale, Tude Auria, Luco, Astorica, Samora, Iria,
*Porcuna now

Gell taccuino 6 pag 176

31
Vetica, ossonoba, Egitania, Colimbiria, Beseo, Lamico, Caliabria, Salamantica, Abela, Elbora, Iabora, Cauria y otros.
4ta Provincia de Saracosta antes Celtiberia, montes de Ercabica y donde nace el rio Tajo, ambos lados del Ebro hasta dentro los montes de Albortat y Albaskenzes. sus ciudades Saracusta, Tarracona, Gerunda, Barciliona, Egara, Empuria. Ausona, Urgelo. Lerida. Tortusa. Wesca. Tutila. Auca. Calahorra. Bambolona. Tarazona. Barbastar. Acoscante, Amaya. Jacca, Segia y otras.
5ta Narbona que esta en tierras de Afranc. desde la falda oriental de los montes de Albortat, como descienden las vertencias hacia el mar de Damasco, entre los montes y la costa del mar hasta el rio de la ciudad Nemauso que entra en el rio Rodano. sus ciudades Narbona, Nemauso. Macalona. Lotuba. Elena y otras.
Jusuf sent his son Abderrahman called Abulaswad. with an army of horse & foot to the Afranc frontiers under Ocaili cousin of Samail general of Syria & Suleiman ben Xibeb with Egyptian Troops to keep down the rebels who presumed on the internal feuds of the Moors in Spain.

O [symbol: triangle] Soliman son of Hixem & Abderahman remaind in the Court of the new Calif Asefa who was very kind to them till Sodaif came to Court & said this
A tus ojos nunca creas
que la apariencia es falaz
y tal vez bajo del brazo
puede ocultarse gran mal
con la espada se repara
Que por eso al lado esta
Y da de mano al azote
Porque no suele bastar,
Hasta que de todo el orbe
en el ambito capaz
De gentes de Beni Omeya
No quede rastro u señal.
When the Calif heard this he ordered them both to be slain. 90 Knights of the Omeya family had fled to the court of Abdala ben Aly – Asefah’s uncle, They were going to dinner with him when a liberto of the Beni Haxiam came into the hall with other verses, so that Abdala had them all killed on the spot. Tables were placed over them & the company eat over them still groaning: very pleasantly. then dug up the dead Califs at Damascus & found Hixem intire whom he first impaled & then burned. Soliman ben Aly the other uncle did the same to the Omeyas & gave them to the dogs till none remained. The verses mentioned Abdelxiamsi the original stock of Omeyas also Alhusein ancestor of Asefah, killed by Jezid & his body dragged & trampled by horses in streets. also Zaydi whose body Hixem impaled. also Ibrahim brother of Asefah who died in prison Vide verses some of them - [symbol: asterisk]

Margin:
The Calif Meruan the last of the Omeyas
The Caudillo Nasir ben Seyar sent him advice of a rebellion thus ao 748. Excelentes
Entre la ceniza fria
Vi lucir leves centellas
Yo temo que han de llegar
a ser llamas descubiertas:
Si acaso no las apaga
con tiempo mano discreta
Lo que estas llamas abrasen
No sera monte ni selva
Sino gente que la vida
entre sus incendios pierda
Dije viendo tal vision
con admiracion de verla
Oh – quien a menos distancia
ahora saber pudiera
Si la sucesion de Omeya
duerme a sueño suelto ū vela.
1o Verses

Merwan lost 30,000 men in battle & the rest were drowned in the Forat (Euphrates), Meruan fled & again fled thro Egipt Saleh took him & sent his head to the new Calif Asefah who occupied the palace of the Califs in Cufa.
arrancado su lengua para embalsamarla una fuina la arrebató castigo divino por las impiedades que Meruan solia decir.
Asi Saleh referia en su carta y versos que escribio a su primo el nuevo Califa
Dios te dio triunfo y victoria
En las batallas de Egipto
Y la muerte a Meruan
por temerario e impio.
Mira cual su lengua paga
cuantos blasfemias ha dicho
Pues la arrastra y la devora
Vil fuina di cortijo –
Aqui vimos a las claras
Como el Señor del destino
A los impios tirános
les da su justo castigo
2d verses.
Ao 749 Xt

Omeyan Califs 14
Moavia ben Abi Sofian 19 years 3m 26days
Jezid 3 years 6m. 3d Moavia ben Jezid 3 months, 4 Meruan ben Hakem. 9m 10 days. 5 Abdelmelic ben Meruan. 13y 4m. 6 el Walid son of Abdelmelic ben Meruan ben Alhakem conquered Spain built fine things in Damascus. reigned 9y.7m. 7th Suleiman ben Abdelmelic 4y 8m. 8th Omar ben Abdelaziz 2y 5m. 9th Jezid ben Abdelmelic 4y 1m. 10 Hixem ben Abdelmelic 19y 9m. his sons went to Spain persecuted by the Califas de Beni Alabas & reigned there. 11th El Walid ben Jezid ben Abdelmelic ben Meruan reigned 1 year 3m. 12 Jezid son of Walid, called el Nakis – 5m 12d. 13th Ibrahim ben Walid 4m & was deposed & died in rio Azabo when Calif Meruan lost the battle. 14 Meruan son of Muhamad ben Meruan ben Alhakem called el Giadi (Sciite)? 5y 10m 15d, killed in Egypt, Vide [symbol: triangle]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 177

28
Serie de los Reyes Moros – Años de Cristo

Sevilla.
Aben Huz. Perdiò la corona conquistada
Sevilla 1248.
Valencia –
Giomail ben Zeyan, que la perdió 1238
Murcia
Abdala Aladel
Muhamad ben Jusef Aben Huz.
Granada KINGS.
Muhamad Aben Alahmar Ist. 1273
Muhamad II. 1302
Abu Abdala Muhamad III destronado 1308
Nazar Depuesto 1313 murio 1322
Abul Walid y Abul Said Ismail murio 1325
Muley Muhamad IV – 1333
Juzef Abul Hagiag – 1354
Muhamad V. Destronado 1359
por Ismail destronado por
Abu Said que muriò a manos del
Rey don Pedro 1361
Muhamad VI 1391
Abu Abdala Juzef 1395
Muhamad VII 1399
Juzef – 1420
Muley Muhamad VIII Depuesto
Muhamad Zaquir IX asesinado
Muhamad Alhayzari depuesto tres veces
Juzef Aben Amar destronado 1433
Muhamad Aben Ozmin huyo en 1454
Aben Ismail 1466
Abul Hacen 1484
Abdalah el Zagal e Abdala el Zaquir acabaron con el imperio.

Margin:
nombres Arabes de esta historia
alah – Dios
alislam o islam la religion mahometana
alcoran – Leyenda – la ley de M
aljama = concejo, ayuntamiento
alcadi. Cadi – Jue de Aljama
alime – Sabio. Alfaki – Doctor
alhageb Ministro principal de Palacio Primer ministro en Cordoba.
alcayde – Caudillo Gobernador
almocri – Lector de mezquita
ain Fuente
alimam Prefecto de la oracion en la mequita
Azala oracion. Azobi del alba – Adohar del medio dia: Alasar de la tarde
almagrib al ponerse el sol. Alatema al anochecer
almimbar – Pulpito
alminar. Faro. torre de mezquita
almueden – Sacristan = muezin
alchatib Predicador
alhafit Doctrinero
almucadem Capitan – adelantero
alnahibe Capitan de Caballería
alferez – el que lleva la bandera
alfaraz. Caballero de lanza y espada
almogaraves – Campeadores – Caballeria de lanzas y ballestas
alhige – peregrinacion santa
algazazes. Batidores y espias
algara – Correria – cabalgada
aliget – Guerra Santa
algacia Conquista expedicion de guerra
alwacir. Minist. princip. de ciudad o palacio
amir, Gefe, Capitan, General, Principe
amir amumenin, Prince of the faithful
amelia Provincia gobierno de ella
alcudia alcaldia – jurisdiccion de alcalde
alcatib secretario
algarbia – parte occidental
afranc – Francia.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 178

27
Alcarria Pueblo villar
Aldea lugar corto
Alhaci, Tutor
Alhali Autorizador de casamiento
Alhace Mandato de tutoria
Acidaque – dote
Algufia – parte norte
Alcala – Castillo
Alcolea – Castillejo
Alcocer – palacio pequeño
Alkibla – parte meridional
Axarquia – parte oriental
Borg – Torre
Cadi Juez. Catib – Escribano.
Chothba, Oracion por el Rey
Cid = Señor – Cidi Senor mio
Gacira = Isla
Gebal = Monte
Guadi -a = Rio
Hans = Castillo
Medina = Ciudad
Munimes = fieles
Naib = Capitan
Said-Almedina = Prefecto de las ejecuciones de justicia
Taa = territorio jurisdiccional
Wacir = Ministo princpl. Governador
Wali = Prefecto caudillo Governador
Wala = por dios
Wadi = guadi

These in years of Hegira from Arabic.
Reyes de Azahila y Aben Razin
Abu Meruan 401
Muhamad Gesan Daula 476
Abelmalek ben Gesan
Yahye ben Gesan 483.

Almeria y Denia
Cairan Eslabo
Zoair do 444
Muhamad ben Man 484
Obeidala Moez Daula 484

First margin:
Reyes de Cordoba not infallible
years of Hegira – from Arabians.
Gehwar 435
Muhamad ben Gehwar. 452
Reyes de Malaga
Aly Aben Hamud 408
Alcasen ben Hamud 415
Yahye ben Aly 417
Edris ben Aly.
- - Valiye
Muhamad Almahdi
Alcasen Almoztali 445
Zagut ben Muhamad 470
De Sevilla
Albucasin Muhamad ben Abed 433
Abu Amru 461
Muhamad Almotamed 484
De Toledo
Ismail ben Dylun
Yahye ben Ismail 469
Alcadir Bilah – 471
Yahye Adofar 478
De Zaragoza
Almondar ben Yahye 430
Soliman Algiuzami 438
Ahmed ben Soliman 474
Juzef ben Ahmed 478
Ahmed ben Giafar 503
Abdelmalek abu Meruan 512
Ahmed abu Giafar ben Abdelmalek 140
De Granada
Abus ben Maskan 420
Habus su sobrino 429
Badis ben Habus 469
Abdala ben Balkin 483
De Badajoz
Sabur persa
Abu baker Abdala
Muhamad Almudafar
Omar Almetuakel 487

2nd margin: writing at 90 degrees within three columns
[symbol: asterisk] Argumnts in verse
y despues que su inconstancia
mostrò la suerte Enemiga
Cuando de sus pies los alza
y otra vez los acaricia
Injusta sera si a un tiempo
Su faz muestra compasiva
Con hijos de Abdelxiamsi
con esa prosapia impia
pues que dios los humillo
por que tu no los humillas
salgan luego de tu casa
no tengas dellos mancilla
De Alhusein y Zaydi
no olvides la muerte indigna
Ni a quien en su propria cama
robaron la dulce Vida
Y aquel inclito Varon
que en Harran amanecia
por las calles arrastrado
muerto con alevosia
y olvidado entre extrangeros
venganza venganza grita. grita
Vide 3 leaves back

Gell taccuino 6 pag 179

26
Carmona y Ezija
Muhamad ben Abdala.

Huelba y Libla
Abdelaziz Albecri 456
Abdala ben Abdelaziz 487

De Lorca
Abu Muhamad Abdala 467
Abul Hasan ben Elisa 484

De Tadmir y Murcia
Muhamad Abu Abderraman
Abderraman ben Taher
Ahmed Abu Abdala 508
Aben Ayad – 540
Muhamad ben Juzef 540
Alwatik ben Muhamad 540
Abu Abdala Muhamad – 569
Abdalah Althogri 541? sic
Abul Hasan ben Abid 542? sic
Aben Hemsek – 560 sic
De Valencia
Mudafas Eslabo – 400
Mubarik Eslabo
Lebib do 452
Abdelaziz ben Abderraman
Abdelmalek ben Abdz. – 469
Abu Bakar Abdelmalek 478
Yahye Adofar 508
Abu Abdala Muhamad 569
Aben Hemsek 509
Giomail ben Zeyan 569
De Segura
Aben Hemsek 569
Reyes Almoravides
Abu Bekar ben Omar 453
Juzef ben Taxfin 500
Aly ben Juzef 534
Taxfin ben Aly 541
Almohades
Ahmed ben Abdala Almahadi 524
Abdelmumen ben Aly 558
Jozef Abu Jacub 580
Jacub Aben Juzef 595
Muhamad ben Jacub 610
Juzef ben Muhamad 620
Abdelwaid 621.

Margin:
Modern Moors by Sr. Arthur Brooke
Present Sultan of Morocco is Muley Abderahman Ben Hisham suppose Hixem of Spaniards. 1822 sultan, many rebellions. Succession nevr undisputed. Atlas tribes always rebel. Bigoted indolent luxurious, but not very cruel is good. Only Plunders & extorts. When he goes to Fez or Mequinez the South rebels when he goes to Morocco the north rebels. Amaar basha of El Garb was cruel &c the Mn tribes complained. Sultan asked 100 000 dollars to remove him. The Basha offered 300 to remain. But tribes rebelled & defeated the Bashas troops [symbol: therefore] Sultan deposed & plundered Basha & gives him Bastinado night & morning.
Muley Ishmael sported in murder carried gun or lance on purpose. Sawing in 2 eyes. crucifying. burying alive & burning. Muley Ismael not passing a river orderd his prisoners to be all killed & with rushes to make the bridge. ???
When one killed by mistake for another he begged pardon. when one was beat & chained it was in way to fortune. Sultan called on him in prison send him clothes & make an officer. but despoiled him after for plunder. his Son Muley Mahomet rebelled but he killed him by cutting of a hand & foot. Muley Zidan other son strangled by wives for cruelty. Muley Ishmael died at 90. had 2 000 women. who quarrelld when he orderd a black Eunuch to weed them 20 or 30 in one day. by a cord round their necks. he had 700 sons on horseback. he married his people to Guinea blacks which makes them now so dark population. his Son Sultan Muley Hamet. Jews in Atlas. Moors tall straight commanding dark eyes white teeth black beard. In hayk like Romans.
No faith to Xtians, cruel, tyrannical. suspicious. not vicious? never speaks of his wife. in 1831 if you could believe such stories.

Difficulties of dates. each arabic year comprises a part of two of our years generally. Arab year lunar 354 days & the intercalary 355. [symbol: therefore] beginning varies. Each year retroceding acia Enero 10 dias in 11. When the Arab year agrees with ours intercalary it recedes 12 days. [symbol: therefore] in 34 years the beginning of Arab Year runs thro’ all our months. Their lunas. Muharram, Safer, Rabié primera, Rabie 2a, Giumada 1a Giumada 2a. Regeb, Xaban, Ramazan, Xawal, Dylcada. Dilhagia. each month from first sight of new moon ‘till 1st sight of next. never exceeds 30 days nor less than 29. so they count them alternately. But Dylhagia has always 30 in intercalary years.

Chap 37 2d Vol of Conde, abt year 1145 talks of the Bab Morur [symbol: triangle] of Granada. Then a great rebellion agst. the Almoravides. Merwan ben Abdelaziz cercò Xatiba, Abu Abdala defendia bien. Abu Giafar Wali of Murcia came to help Meruan in siege 2d time. The Almoravide garrison forced into the Alcasaba. Aben Ayadh the Alcayde came to help the Valencians. Then Abdala aben Gania gave up city & retired to Almeria. Then Meruan took & fortified Xatiba & went to Valencia paying well. Entered Valencia on a dromedary hermoso con preciosos vestidos y lucientes armas. rodeade de Xeques y nobles Cavy. in triumph. luna Safer 540 or 1145. Lecant united. and comand by Merwan ben Abdelaziz. Abu Giafar returned to Murcia pursuing & robbing the Almoravides in their way to Almeria. In Granada rebellion continued. the Almoravides defended themselves in Alcazaba. The rebels sent to Cordova for help. The Cadi Abul Hacen ben Adha wrote & Hamdain sent su sobrino Aly ben Omar Muhamad Adha conocido por Omilimad. & from Gien came Aben Gozei the Alcayde with troops & mil caballos de la Ajarquia & united to Abu Giafar of Murcia made 12 000 horse & more foot. The Almoravids frightened fled from Alcasaba at Alba & joind their friends en cercanias de Granada. fell on the Rebels killed Giafar of Murcia routed all & returned to Alcazaba. The fugitive Murcians returning to their city proclaimed Amir the noble Xeque Abderrahman ben Tahir, 1145 540. Wali Almanzor & his Almoravides in Alcasaba di Malaga yielded the fort & Amir Abu Alhakem Ben entered. 540. The Wali Almanzor went into Murcia to his father Abu Muh ben Alhag.
Tahir from love to family of Aben Hud named Seif-Dola Aben Hud his Naib in Murcia. Thence Abu Muhamad ben Alhag & Aben Suar & others went to Cordova

Gell taccuino 6 pag 180

25
[Symbol: triangle] Emir Handain of Cordova recd well & sent su primo Alfolfoli y su sobrino Omilimad with horse to turn Aben Tahir out of Murcia. Tahir sent for help to to Alcayde Abu Muh’ ben Ayadah of Valencia.
He came & met Zaonun Alcayde of Auriola who made him Amir at Auriola of Murcia, Poor Tahir knew not of this & went with a troop & joy to meet him 1145, 540, at Alcazarquibir. Abu Tahir went to Dar Saguir & finding out how it was retired to his own house quietly. Many wishd Ayadh to kill him but he would not, knowing his worth, & thus was deposed Abderrahman Aben Tahir. after being Wali 50 days for his Ally.. Then people of Valencia wanted to depose Amir Meruan ben Abdelaziz. People of Lecant, Liria Gezira Xucar y Murbiter wrote to Aben Ayadh of Murcia to come. Meruan fled to Alcazar from the mob, whence he got to a friends house & thence by night over the walls, broken bones, one guide, lost way in Mts. of Almeria fell into hands of Alcayde Muh’ ben Maymun, who knew & sent him in chains to Abdala ben Gania, el sobrino, who carried him about in chains.
Meruan ben Abdelaziz fled from Valencia to Colbira & then tired returned by night to Valencia where in a house where recognised again escaped fell into hands of Maymun & so to Gania el sobrino,
At Valencia, the Naib of Aben Ayadh proclaimed Emir Abdala ben Muhd ben Sad ben Mardanis, & placed him in Alcazar. Soon after came Aben Ayadh & remained some time & then went to Murcia leaving for Naib Abu Muh ben Sad. This mans people took Abu Giafar Ahmed ben Gubeir father of Abu Husein el Sabio who defended the Alcazar del pueblo, y le envio en cadenas al castillo Maternis & put him in a tower. ransomed him with 3000 doblas & stole his books to his greatest grief. He went to Xatiba wher again caught by Aben Gania who kept him in a dark prison till sent to Majorca.
When Hamdain saw Seif Dola chased from Cordova he went to Gien & gaind over the Alcayde Aben Gozei who burned with revenge against Granada together with Hamdain. They entered Granada por Bab Morur the Cadi Aben Adha came to meet there on foot. he saluted them & hospedò. as also his son Amad-Dola. He called for water Aben Ada brought the cup an Alima said Senor drink not que esta confeccionada. He drank not & Aben Adha ashamed to be suspected drank it all himself. He however died in the night. for en verdad estaba confeccionada con ponzoña agridulce, que parecia agua de azucar y naranja. fuese acaso u maliciosamente preparada para acabar con quien la bebiera de los Aben Hudes Aben Hud would not stay in City but made a fine pavilion in gardens above for 10 days. Then pasó a la Alcazaba Alamra o de los Principes y alli hubo sangrientas battallas con los Almoravides que se defendian valerosamte contra Aben Hud y los de la ciudad, y asi cada dia morian muchos de cada parte. Till on 8th day the Almoravides beat in hōrible battle the citizens & Aben Hud with immense slaughter and took wounded Amad-Dola son of Seif Dola Aben hud who died in Alcazaba that night of his wounds. The Almoravids sent him cafanado to his father to bury in a caja de grana con franjas de oro llena de preciosas aromas.

Margin:
Aben Hud only staid one month at Granada for people were tired of the evils of war & of him, so at night he went to Gien, having in City of Granada as governor Abu Hasan ben Adha el de la copa (son of course of him.
The citizens made peace with the Almoravides of the Alcazaba of whom some went to Almunecab puerto de Elbira para estar mas dispuesto para pasar a Africa.

next chapter 38 treats of other civil wars

[Arabic] Hippocrates
[Arabic] Hanno
[Arabic] Varro
[Arabic] Hesiodus Ascraeus
Abraham Ben Jahia Alnacasch Abu Isaac vulgo Ben Zarcalli Cordubensis great astronomer quite like a modern astronomer as to science wrote 51 Books on problems – as declination of Sun. Azimuthi delineationem in Terra effingere &c &c. 5th age of Hegira.

A Certain Senanus was made licenser of Physicians by Almoctader the Emperor ao Heg 319 To him came a dignified Doctor, in a paper in his sleeve he presented gold money said he could neither read nor write but had a numerous family. Senanus said then never practise either bleeding nor cathartics nor in any malady you dont well know. That is exactly my way said the Doctor I have never used any thing but jallap & oxymel & went his way.
Segovia Gate
Pen and ink drawing: view of Segovia

Gell taccuino 6 pag 181

24
Pen and ink drawing: tower
[Framed] Tower of Segovia
Moorish Palace or Alcazar on a rocky peninsula between the river Eresema & a ravine. many ceilings gilt & with sentences from Koran. Plaster Compartments
Under the Torre de siete suelos are The other unseen stories or vaults in which is treasure & the [drawing: animal] called Belludo pursued by seven hell hounds. The Tower on W. side of Alhambra not far from water tower at South point. There are not more than 3 or 4 stories above ground. The King is said to have retired by this gate but perhaps he came out of it to meet King Ferdinand at St. Salvador near the present Passeo de Xenil –

Margin:
Arabic M.S. in Escurial says. Mankeri & Nakeri 2 terrible angels who set a man upright in his Tomb.. & examine his belief in Unity & the Apostle. Quis est Dominus tuus & quae Religio tua & quis Propheta tuus. Only a sect believed in this.
In 1412 the hall of Arteson in the Alcazar of Segovia with a gothic inscription. Esta obra mando fazer la muy esclarecida Señora Reina Doña Catalina &c madre del Señor Rey Don Juan 1412.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 182

23
NAMES OF MOORISH TOWNS Kgdom of GRANADA
[Arabic] Alcabzac = Alcaudete
[Arabic] Schalubaniat = Salobreña
[Arabic] Almankab = Almuñecar
[Arabic] Kigiatha = Quesada
[Arabic] Albasch = Helvas
[Arabic] Hosnalzahr = Peñaflor
[Arabic] Kalathamad = Alamedilla
[Arabic] Fahsalballuth = Llano de las Bellotas.
[Arabic] Prelium Acab. La batalla de las Navas
[Arabic] = Tabernas from Ebn Alkhatib Mohamad 		Ebn Abdalla of Corduba 		Cronographer to King of Granada &c
[Arabic] Zalia
[Arabic] Berja
[Arabic] Vera
[Arabic] Moxacra a new town or [Arabic] gedit
[Arabic] Cotoria
[Arabic] Purchena
[Arabic] Oria
[Arabic] Baza
[Arabic] Huescar
[Arabic] Andarax. serico et auro
[Arabic] Schealesch vulgo Sal
[Arabic] Finana
[Arabic] Alhama [Arabic: same]
[Arabic] Salaha
[Arabic] Albera Olbera
[Arabic] Montefrio
[Arabic] Loxa
[Arabic] Archidona
[Arabic] Schardar
[Arabic] Antiquera
[Arabic] Requena
[Arabic] Carthama
[Arabic] Ronda

Al Balisi an author of Velez [Arabic]

Orihuela Arbela [Arabic]

[Arabic] Alcorduba

Margin:
Vadi Alhagera = Guadalaxara.
a book there. 1425 nativitatis.
[Arabic] 1 - [Arabic] 2 - [Arabic] 3 - [Arabic] 4 - [Arabic] 5 - [Arabic] 6 - [Arabic] 7 - [Arabic] 8 - [Arabic] 9 - [Arabic] 10 - [Arabic] 20 - [Arabic] 30 - [Arabic] 40 - [Arabic] 50 - [Arabic] 60 - [Arabic] 70 - [Arabic] 80 - [Arabic] 90 - [Arabic] 100 - [Arabic] 200 - [Arabic] 300 - [Arabic] 400 - [Arabic] 500 - [Arabic] 600 - [Arabic] 700 - [Arabic] 800 - [Arabic] 900 - [Arabic] 1000 - [Arabic] 1000. A work of Avicenna written at Vadi Alhagera (copied).
A Galen also written in Murcia
Arab & Turkish nomenclature.

Avicenna Testamentum ad Medicos begins
[Arabic]
Observa fili mi praecepta mea

Book at Toledo 26 april ao Xt 1295 a Jew Doctor called to Kg Ferdinand son of Sanctii Regis at midnight found him in violent fever gave a quantity of cold water. next day well after sleep.

[Arabic]	[Arabic]			[Arabic]
Bubalus	Bos			Taurus
[Arabic]	[Arabic]			[Arabic]
equus	elephas			camelus
	[Arabic]			[Arabic]	
	porcus			asinus

Taki: fearing God
Zaki: pure: innocent
Mogaieth Eddin = propagator of the Faith
Emir al moumenin

Gell taccuino 6 pag 183
22
MUHAMED ABU ALAHMAR.
Abu Abdallah = father of Abdallah?? called also Muhamed Ibn Alahmar or Muhamed son?? Of Alahamar [symbol: therefore] Abu father & son. oh oh. Ben Alahim would be son of – – . Abu Alahmar his name in short – founder of Alhambra born in year 1195 or year of Hegira 591. of family Bena Nasar. made governor of Arjoua? Arjona & Jaen – At death of Aben Hud many factions & divisions in Spain & in 1238 he became Kg. of Granada. made hospitals colleges fountains baths &c – but James the Conqueror had subdued Valencia & Ferdinand the Saint came to Andalusia & beseiged Jaen Muhamed Abu Alahmar went to him kneeled & became his Vassal – paid tribute – attended Cortes as Vassal noble & served in war with horsemen. Served Ferdinand with 500 Knights at seige of Seville. Ao 1248 Seville taken, Muhamed foresaw the ruin of Moslems, said “Que angoste y miserabile seria nuestra vida, sino fuera tan dilatada y capaciosa nuestra esperanza” –
He returned unhappy to Granada. People hailed him as El Ghalib – he shook his head saying Wa la ghalib ila Ala. Then he took this motto. He used to say “Arm thy self in peace clothe thyself in summer” aware that his peace with Xtians could not last long. Encouraged arts, planted. Silk. gardens gold mines – other metals. made gold money with his own name. Begun Alhambra after 1248. His dress plain. Went seldom to his harem. Made his wifes live in friendship. Made Alhambra gardens with flowers & delighted in them. Read histories. taught his 3 sons. –
Ferdinand died at Sevilla in 1254. Abu Alahmar sent 100 Knights to funeral to Kg Alonzo Xth. who each carried a taper – He sent these every year on anniversary. Went himself to battle in his 79th year to resist an invasion. The Alcayde going out broke his lance against gate – bad omen – King taken ill & nearly fell. Don Philip, brother

Margin:
to King Alonzo X was with him. put in silver coffin embalmed and buried in a marble sepulchre in Alhambra. His treasury always full though he spent much whence people said he dealt in magic. His name often repeated in the inscripts of Alhambra –
Yusef Abul Hagig finished the building & ornaments of Alhambra. King in 1333.

Pen and ink drawing: mosque
MOSQUE?
Cathedral & Alcazar of Granada 1529 Diego de Siloe architect with Covarrubias?
Huat idris – I think is Apes hill. Vateres. Guadres marmol Afric. The best soldiers of Kg of Granada came thence. They had a guard of 500 who lived in the Calle de los Gomeles. Bula lul the Orlando of the Moorish songs came hence, Killed in plain of Tolosa in hegira 609 or 1231.

Pencil drawing: very faint plan
Mesquita Major
Granada
[Arabic]

Castillo de Bibataubin is in Carrera de Xenil
[Arabic: kufic script]
Ben Muhamed
In Cufic. the letters being without the points are difficult to distinguish –

Gell taccuino 6 pag 184

21
Arabian Spanish names &c
[Arabic]
[Arabic]
Moslema Ben Ahmad Abul cassem of Madrid
[Arabic]
Madrid or Magrit a little place near Alcala ao xt 1087: ao Hegira 398. Almagrid.
Leo Afric?
[Arabic] Barbar: peregrini Pliny. Sabarbares.
[Arabic] Alcorduba Cordova
Ebn Albanna Granatensis in Scientiam Logisticam.
Abu Isaac Abrahami vulgo Alphardi nobilis Granats. Poema de Haereditate.
Carmen de Temporum cognitione Ben Schariph Alzabdi Heg. ao. 601 of Ronda
Vizir Abu Mohamad Ben Omad writes dedicatory oration to Abu Nassar Ismail Kg. Granada Heg. ao. 761 to The work in artem Numericam of Ben Albanna by Abdelazizi Ali Ben Daud Alhauari.
Apollonius. Eutocii in Archimedis Librum de Sphaera & Cylindro –
Dioclis de speculis ustoriis. Astronomy of Cadi Zadeh commented by Senan Pascha.
Ammon Geometra. Theodosius Ariston, Aristarchus. Aimonius. Philemon. Plato. Erhotus or Aratus
Eutocius or Eutharchius. Mathem. Alexandrinus. written [Arabic].
Lexicons numberless. Ebn Seira XXIV books words senses origins. Proverbs. Fables Locman. Philosophy mathematics. medicine. Nat’ History Harun Almansor & Almaimon faventes.
Only in Arabic Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum libri quinque.
Galeni 2d Commentaries 2 3 4 & 6 on Hippocrates Epidemiorum librum secundum. & other books only in Escurial.
Astronomy Abi Schaker Granatensis
Mathem’ Ebn Albanna Granatensis
Khogenda a great city 7 days from Samarcand on river Sihun. gardens & fruits.
Moh’ Ben Schariph Alhasbati Logic Granada.
Hortus or Ortus disputationum Fakhreddin Razaeus who wrote against a heretic who gave God eyes & body. Ahmad Ben Hayet a Motazelite said Xt had really come in body & was the Verbum aeternum & incarnatum.

Margin:
Jahia & Moysem Maimonidem genere Judaeum whose advice caused Ferdinand IV K.S. to drink plentifully of cold iced water in a fever. Works in Escurial preserved by Moors.
Abu Mohamad Abdalla of Corduba Equestris Theatri spectacula.
Isa Ben Ali Hassan of Granada. Hawking & hunting.
Geography & Travels of all sorts. Chronology.
Abu Abdallah alkatib Granatensis hist of Kgs of Spain or Caliphs of Spain & Africa.
Lives of famous men & horses even & Kts. arms habits & customs by Abu Abdallah Mohamad Ben Zaiad of Corduba.
Dict hist Scientiam Moh Abu Abdah Granatensis
De Vini laudibus Abu Isaac Abrahim with 355 Epigrams in praise of Wine – Drinking jokes &c.
Liber Vitae perennis ao 432 Heg died at Albusia inter Bokhora & Samarkand.
Also a very free Amantis confabulationem very witty &c
Anatomy of Women &c
Liber elegantiarum Delectus.
Dictionary by Moh’ Ben Abdelmalek of Xeres.
Codex Arabic Hebrew latin by Johannes Leo Granaten’ once Alhassam Ben Mohamad Alvazan Fessanus. Heg 930. 15243 Xti Leo Africanus, he was of the noble family of Zaidi-tarum Granatae.
Elmansor of Rasis ob 320 Heg. Medicina Mansoriana.
Dict Graeco Arabicum
Analysis – Argumentation. Conditiones certae fidei.
Doct Razaeus Sapientiae Arcana. Logic. Definitions Syllogisms. Tractatus Solaris.
Mysteriorum Thesaurus.

[Arabic]

Fax Luminum – Porphyrius Syrus Tyri. Ammonius
From Sevilla many. Abulsat Omiah Ben Abdelaziz Botany.
Veritatis instructio Moh’ Ebn Almoaidi of Cordova wrote it at Granada Heg 798 Xt 1395.
Ali Alkateb logic Granada 1395 or 798.
Aristotelis Organum Syriac.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 185

20
Serendit is called Sarnadib. on Mt says the Nubian Geogr all sorts of jacinths are found in a valley Adamas which sculpts other gems, on Mt Spices aromatic. Aloes. Musk. Zibeti. Sugarcanes Cypress. Nux Indica. In streams Beryllus. Fishing.
Several books like those of Herculaneum de Ira &c Virtues & Vices. Florilegium &c
Regum ac militiae Ducum Regimen.

Work of Abm Ben Jahia Alnacsch Abu Isaac vulgo Ben Zarcalli of Corduba has an incredible number of Astron’ propositions on taking latitudes. &c &c &c very scientific
De ratione Harmonica &c&c Ahmad Ben Omar Alkarabisi.
Alhassan Ben Alkhathib predicted the Kg of Egypts death if the decensus Saturni in primum geminorum gradum contingeret but it was false.
Alhassan on eclipses. quadratura parabolae. Geodaesiae principiis. De Harmonia numerica De Lunae motu, De inveniendis Cubi lateribus. De corona circa Lunam. De horologiis horizontalibus. De Clepsydrae usu &c. Algebra. De Speculis parabolicis comburendis &c
Giaphare Ben Almoktaphi wrote on Tailed Comets. ao Heg 225 temp Caliph Almotasem a black spot for many days in Suns centre 91 days & Caliph died. But two [drawing: comet] were seen before death of Raschid.
P241 read in Uni
Liber primus de febrium differentiis
The 2d Book of this read & written in the College of Toledo. ao Heg 333. ao Xti. 944
Galen 6 Books of Medicine written at Granada Heg 646. Xt 1248
[Arabic] Galen many copies translated into Arabic

Margin:
Albategni wrote Heg. 269. He was Harranita professione Sabaeus (ie) Cultor Stellarum. Astronomical calculations died Heg 317 Xti 929. Works at Granada. Longitudes Universal History &c.
[Arabic]	[Arabic]
Anazarbeus	Dioscorides
	medicus [Arabic]
[Arabic]
Scriptus est in “excelsa Granata urbe Regia

Poema de testamento de Consanguinitate ejusque gradibus ac de Haereditate et Haerede auctor Abu Mohamad Abdalla Ben Abrahim Granatensis.
Legal Decisions by Abu Isaac Abrahamus Ben Abdelrahman. Praefectus Regiae Curiae Granatensis. p457
Codex literis Cuphicis exoratus Marochi Heg 944 but the author abu Baker Asemo Alcaisi. Granatae Cancellarius. born in ao Heg 760. died 829. Munus Judicibus oblatum.

Theatrum Judicum by Mohamad Ben Abraham Ben Farhun a Lawyer of Granada ao Hegirae 811.

Several books on Matrimony.

Amantium Certamina by Ahmad Ben Abrahim Ben Mohamad a Syrian who lived at Granada ao Hegirae 812.

Codex lit Cuph exaratus Granatae
Averrois tractatus de Sacrificiis or Animals for Sacrifice or Victuals according to Mahomn law.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 186

19
In a Toletan MS of Galen is a note Dno Moyse Susani filio with his friend Joanne Moysis filio Ben Feris. read this work 25 Novr aerae Sapharensis id est Hispanae 1422. Xti 1384 idque in urbe Toleto quam deus servet incolumem. A Jew & Xtian Physician of Toledo. Also there notes Xtiani duce Rege Ferrando urbem Jaen recuperarunt die 4 Martis ao Xt 1245. Hispalim 26 Aprilis 1248. Tharifam 21 Sept ao 1340. 1257 Nieblam.
Alphonsus Rex astronomus ob Heg 683 1284 of Xt.
Sanchus obiit Toleti 26 April. 1295 Xt.
obiit Rex Ferrandus in Jaen 7 Sept 1310.
Obt ejus filius Rex Alphonsus in monte expugnationis id est Gibelthar 26 Martii. Xt 1350
Ejus filius Rex Petrus 1368
Rex Henricus 1379
Rex Johannes equo prolapsus ao 1390
Rex Henricus obt Toleti 20 decr. 1432
Regina Catharina obt in Valladolid in Arabic Baladualid [Arabic] id est urbs principis Mauritani Valid ao 1418 – all notes in this book – p248

Corans without number p486

Explanation of Mahom faith by Abu Abdallah Mohamad ben Joseph Abderita for Abi Abdalla Mohammad King of Granada who was of the Nasserites & died Hegirae 733

[Arabic]

Margin:
Codex – Comment on Khalil ben Isaac great Lawyer by Scharapheddin Althakhikhi Lawyer of Granada.

Same epitomized by Abdelrahman Alagehuri of Granada.

Same in 8 Vols by Nassereddin Alzarcani of Granada.

Abdallah Ben Mohamad Ben Zakri Heg 838 Lawyer of Granada.

Admonitions to Judges &c Heg 896 by Abu Abdallah Mohamad Ben Abdalla vulgo Almoknasi chief judge of Granada.

Of Cordova Abu Othman Sada Ben Abi Giaphar Ahmad Ben Leon Altagibi Law,
[Arabic]

Copy of Codex Cuph in urbe Guadix Heg 820 de Jurisprudentie carmen – Auctor Abu Giaphar Mohamad of Granada 790 Heg.

Book of Kings Tributes & Rents of Cordova Heg 677 Xti 1278, by Abu Giaphar Ben Nasser Alravadi of Cordova. Orders that Xtians when conquered by Mahometans may have lauds & Churches

Even books from Bokhara in Spain.

Abdelrahman Alagehuri of Granada Civil law,

Poem on Logic & Algebra by a Cordovan Author with Comment by Ben Ali ben David Almosarati of Granada 7th century Heg.

Book of Both Laws or Pandects.

Book to confute the Mahometan methodists who would not allow of music &c well confuted.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 187

18
Codex Arabico Latinus Alcorani confutatio. Auctor P. Dominicus Germanus de Silesia.

Epistles of S Paul St John S Jude &c &c &c

Codex Arab. Codex. Sacrorum Canonum collectio ad Usum Hispana-Ecclesiae.

Codex Heg 692 of Dr Ali Ben Hassan Alhossain of Granada Lexicon Theologicum.

Heg 752 Epitome of Theological Dogmas by Abdelrahman Ben Mohamad ebn Khaldun Alhadrami of Granada

Synopsis Theologica of Abulabbas Ahmad Ben Mohamad vulgo Ebn Albanna of Granada.

Scholastic Theology de Actibus humanis by Ebn Altalmansani of Granada

Mahomet Alkobari of Granada wrote Unitatis & fidei scientia comments on Heg 954.

Poem explaining Alcoran by Ebn Haian of Granada Heg 792

on the Coran – The shining Star by Abu Mohan’ Abdalla Ben Alvaschi of Toledo but at Granada ob Heg 487
many others –

Heg 652 Ebn Alkathib of Granada Oceani Rivus on the Alcoran

Abdalla Ben Moh’ ben Zakri Granada Heg 838 wrote Curiosi Viri desiderium.

Margin:
The library had 600 000 volumes. 44 of catalogue 300 writers & more. 70 public libraries in Andalusia. 3d Caliph had 12 045 000 dinars or 6 millions of £ per anm. Cordova had 640 mosques. 900 baths 200 000 houses. Banks of Guadalquivir had 12000 Villages.
Saraglio had 6,300 persons. had a guard of 12 000 horse.
[Arabic] Dar el Kalifat the Kalifs Palace – dar is door porte, dar demeure.
Almogares = soldados viejos in Castle garrisons. Elite.
[Arabic] Talayha = piquet or adorned post.
[Arabic] pickets of Muslemin
[Arabic] Alcayde = commander of 10 men.
[Arabic] = Calatrava – rabia rabat [Arabic]
rab rabat towers of sentinels, round towers,
[Arabic] Alcantara from bridge. 2 Spanish orders with arab names. Fontarabia from [Arabic]
Almogavares from [Arabic] gar = pillage.
Almogavares of Granada = peons labradores y hombres del Campo. 3 Knights with 2 of these in Las antiguidades de la ciuidas de España 1775 mentions these as distinguished

Adalides [Arabic] = guides. Almocadems [Arabic] chief. in armies. King only named these.
An Adalid had a dress, a sword, a horse & 2 armours. a rich man girded on his sword & he was hoisted on his shield. He drew his sword & turning defied the enemies of his King.
Thus an Adalid was a Knight or like one.
A Kt or Rico ombre had coat of arms & a Banner. If an Adalid was taken by Enemy the state ransomed them & had them cruelly killed. yet the honour sought by Knights.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 188

17
vid p38 history early

Leon & Asturias
718 Pelagius
737 Favila
739 Alfonso S. Catholic
757 Froila
768 Aurelio
774 Silo
783 Mauregat Usurp
788 Bermudas 1st.
791 Alfonso I Chaste
842 Ramirus I
850 Ordogno I
886 Alfonso the Great
911 Garcias
914 Ordogno II
923 Froila II
924 Alfonso IV
927 Ramirus II
950 Ordogno III
955 Ordonio usurp
955 Sancho the Big
967 Ramirus III
982 Bermudus II
999 Alfonso V
1027 Bermudus III

Counts of Barcellona
801 Bera
820 Bernard
844 Alderan
858 Wifred
872 Salaman
880 Wifred 2
911 Miran
928 Seniofred
967 Borellus
993 Raymond I
1017 Berenger I
1035 Raymond 2
1067 Raymond 3
1081 Raymond 4 Berenger
1131 Raymond Beren V. ob 1162 when county fell to Arragon

moors had almost all Spain in 712 but lost Asturias in 716
Salvarba in 750
Catalonia in 820
Leon in 923
Castile in 1073
Aragon in 1118
Cordova & Jaen 1236
Seville 1248
Valencia 1264
Murcia 1265
Granada 1492.
Moors invented paper.

Castile
1035 Ferdinand I
1037 Kings of Leon Asturias
1065 Alfonso VI & I
1070 Sancho II
1072 Alfonso 7
1109 Uraca & Alfonso 8
1157 Sancho III
1158 Ferdinand 2
1188 Alfonso 9
1214 Henry I
1217 Ferdinand 3
1252 Alfonso X wise
1284 Sancho 4
1295 Ferdinand 4
1312 Alfonso 11
1350 Peter Cruel
1369 Hen. 2
1379 John I
1390 – Hen. 3
1406 John 2
1454 Hen IV
1474 Ferdin V & Isabella
1504 Joanna & Philip.

Aragon
1035 Ramirus I
1070 Sancho I
1094 Peter I
1104 Alfonso I
1134 Ramirus 2
1137 Pelonille & Raymond Berenger
1162 Raymond Alfonso 2
1196 Peter 2
1213 James Victorius
1276 Peter 3
1285 Alfonso 3
1291 James 2
1327 Alfonso 4
1336 Peter 4
1387 John I
1395 Martin
1412 Ferdinand
1416 Alfonso V
1458 John 2
1479 Ferdin 2 nupt Isabel of Castilla
1516 Charles Ist King of Spain.

Navarre
831 Aznar Count
836 Sancho
853 Garcia
857 Garcias Ximenes
880 Fortunio Ist King
905 Sancho I
926 Garcias I
978 Sancho II
994 Garcias 2
1000 Sancho Great 3
in 1512 subject to Castille.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 189

16
Verses by Valadata Daughter of Mohamad Almostakfi Billah of Cordova to her lover Abansi – a noble Moor.
from Arabic in Escurial.
“My presence wounds your heart, yet not less true
“My cheeks in blushes speak my love for you
“Yet mutual wounds not equal shame impart
“By all my cheek is seen but not your heart.

King Don Hernando took Ronda in 485 [Arabic] before 1486.
In Marmol – prophecy in inquisition of Granada .p182. that Turks will take Rome with armies & the Moors will take the Isla de España, y Malaga se tornara a labrar y edificar. At Velez & Almuñecar will be quell’d the pride of the heresy of Cordova which keeps it in its vices & sins. A Comet the sign of this.
Recibo de ti mi dios lo que me has ordenado. Çidi el Guerguali a Morabite.
Prophecy of Tauca al Hamema or Doves breast. Succour to Islam when year begins with Saturday & a cloud of birds come among which 2 are Gabriel & Miguel – then all world moslem –
In inquisition of Granada & in cave of Castares in Alpuxárra. Translated by Alonzo del Castillo Interpreter of Office. but he says the Arabic is so equivocal that a long or short vowell makes all the difference. “The generation of those who adore one only God shall possess Gibraltar for it was their origin & entry & to them shall return in 10th succession. y que dios revelo no falto ni faltarà.
Convertios a dios y no os durmais que amanecerais sepultados entre las peñas.
The [drawing: crescent moon] shall descend into the garden of Tuhema after the [drawing: full moon] shall have risen split & prophets shall appear. Then shall a King son of a faultless King with Troops take Alhambra & thence many provinces & climes. Then shall be glory to the Moors. He takes Seville & at the first sally Antequera climbing its walls & by force of arms rompiendolos. 7 years this victory endures & riches taken from Heretics. Dolarfe King of the Xtians. A Brutal old Antichrist will sow at midday & reap at vespers
He Plants trees with right & plucks fruits with left hand – Sins were before as heavy as mountains.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 190

15
Visir y Hagel del Palacio mayordomo mayor.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 191

14
MOORISH TERMS IN SPAIN. Por D. Eugenio Llaguno y Amirola y D. Juan Cean Bermudez.
Alhambra = dar alamra = casa real. Rey Alhamar
Almacen = magazine
Almaceria = maceria
Almadena a pickaxe
Almagre red chalk
Almena = battlements
Almorabe: ornamts
Almocavar cementerio
Almodovar: circular place
Almorefa pavement
Almunia = watered garden
Anaquel = shelves?
Anoria = water wheel
Arrecife paved road
Atarazana = dock
Atahona = flour mill
Atalaya – Tower or Castle
Ataurique plaster ornts
Axaraca eastern ornamts. lazos.
Axarafe = mirador &c
Aximenez sunny gallery
Aximez [drawing: window] window
Azogue place of market at Segovia
Azores = muros
Azothea = terraced roof
Azulejos
Barro = puddle
Borje torre metido en un Castillo
Cala = Castillo
Calabozo = prison
Calahorra – strong place
Caz canal	Naguela = straw hut
Cenefa a border.	Rambla = arenal
Chafariz = fountain
Dar azultam = Kings house
Faxa = cinta
Loxa = Piedra = muela.
Maxaraque: solana to East
Mazmorra = calabozo
Traza Architects place
Xarahiz = [drawing: circle] wall
Zaguan atrio great portal
Zocodover zoco-dober plaza detras as at Toledo behind Alcazar
Zubia = place of many waters.

Margin:
Aceña = water mill
Acequia a canal
Acitara = wall of brick & mortar
Adarve = walk on battlements
Adobe = sunburnt bricks
Aduana = casa de colecion
Aduar a [drawing: circle]r population
Alhacena: a cupboard
Alambor scarp in fortification
Alamin = architect
Alamud cerrojo o pasador en ventanas palo principal del pabellon.
Alarife. Sage mechanist. Gene el Arif = garden del maestro Jucef Nazar.
Alazana. mill of oil.
Albacara a salient tower
Albardilla. coping tiles
Albanar = conduits	Almohadas. piedras de silleria resaltadas en los edificios.
Albarrana = atalaya
Alberga = estanque. Dovetower
Albuhaire laguna also arches with azulejos
Alcala: castillo
Alcantara = Puente
Alcatifa centre of pavement
Alcaycaria bazaar
Alcoba alcove
Alcolba little castle
Aldaba = ironbolt
Alfagia = atrio
Alfarda = geometric ceiling
Alfarge artesonado de los Techos. El pie de Piedra o ladrillo sobre que se coloca una cama &c y la misma cama Vide Queens bath Alhambra
Algar = cavern
Algez = gypsum
Alhanat = tent
Alhania, alcove
Alhanga = arch
Alicatado = obra de azulejos
Alizar ornamts of tiles
Aljube Algibe
Algoaza = place to wash

Gell taccuino 6 pag 192

13
Quarter of a Spanish Vara
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 [measured ruler]
A Vara is 3 feet each foot is 10 inches & 7/8ths English qu??

Gell taccuino 6 pag 193

12
[Blank]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 194

11
[Blank]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 195

10
[Blank]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 196

9
Spanish Romances. most ancient are of 13 century – the last of the 15th.
some really translated from Arabic. written in reigns of Aben Hassan. Muley Abdallah & Boabdil. Romances of Rodriguez later.
But those of Rodrigo the oldest.
Bernardo del Carpio son of Sancho Diaz Ct of Saldaña & a Daur of Alphonso the chaste.
Fernan Gonzales Ct of Castille.
Adarga a round shield. Azagaya a javelin
El Marabeth. Morabeth a Tribe of Zahara.
Alcala Castle or Citadel.
Mudexares = tributaries?
Alcayceria the bazar.
“Cries resound in the Towers of the Alhambra & through the City of Granada in all parts. For without reason the King has beheaded in one day 36 abencerrages nobles of great valour. Accused by the Zegries & Gomeles of treason. All the Dames weep all that are in Granada. From the windows & open galleries are shewn mourning draperies..”
Alhama taken by Don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon in 1483.
Rioverde under Ronda
Sierra bermeja between Malaga & Gibraltar.
Fernando Perez de Pulgar wrote avemaria on mosque door.

De Rasis. Hist from Arabic translated into Spanish ergo true history. tum notabilia quaedam inde excerpta & diligenter examinata.

Margin:
Pedro de Lara ao 1611 near Salè took 2 ships of Zidan Kg of Morocco. took 3000 MSS. King offered 70 000 Ducats for ransom. Kg of Spain answered he would have the release of all the Xtian Slaves. The Kg Zeidan would have given them but having war with un Morabito y con su sobrino Muley Xeque could not, so the books went to the Escurial. Vida y hechos del Rey D. Phelipe III. by Gonzales Davila. Many burnt June 7 1671.
Ualadata daughter of Kg Mohamad Almostakphi Billa Kg of Spain Poesies in quantity.
De Urbe Ramla or Rama by Ebn Alkalife, who gives history also of Samarcand &c. also of the Bibliotheca of Porphyrius.
Dioscorides. Hippocrates. Galen. Plato. Euclid. Ptolemy. Zoroaster. of the city Tadmir.
On Cannon & Nitrati pulveris & the ancient use of paper by the Arabs. Nubian Geographer.
De Nominis Andalusia etymo –
Many of these were in library – Royal at Granada but taken at the fall to Morocco.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 197

8
Caliph of house of Ommiyah reigned in Spain ao 900
Africa Egypt Syria Arabia subject to Abassides
The Caliph Abdoulrahman had an income of 6,000 000 Millions of £ which says Gibbon surpassed that of all united Xtian Kings. ao. 912 to 1005.
ao 1038 Xtians attacked Moors in Spain.
Siege of Toledo lasted a year 1085. The Cid. under Alphonso VI.
Saragossa taken from Moors 1162 by a King of Arragon.
Lisbon or Porto Calle 1139 taken from the Miramolins.
Cordova said to have had 200000 houses & 12 000 villages when the capital of the Ommiades

Peak of Mulhacen 1826 toises 10956 feet above sea. M Clement Roxas – 39 toises higher than the highest peak of Pyrenees (the granitic peak of Nethou) & 83 toises lower than the trachytic peak of Teneriffe – This Sierra Nevada is a system of michaschiste mountains passing into gneis & thonschiefer et qui renferme des bancs d’euphotide et de grunstein. Don Jose Rodriquez. Annales de chimie Tom XX. from Humboldt.

Extirpation only can be successful. This not easy if sect numerous. perseverance of great bodies in this quite impossible. Rulers mortal. quarrel together. Differ in shad. pity even indolence vanity fear distrust would do the part of exiled virtues.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 198

7
[Blank]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 199

6
Pencil drawing: map of section of Lines of Torres Vedras, Portugal

Gell taccuino 6 pag 200

5
[Blank]

Gell taccuino 6 pag 201

4
Persians Shiites Ottomans Sunites. At Bagdad & Ispahan the two sects fought. Sultan Selim killed 40000 Shiites Contemporary of Henry VIII of England. Francis I of france Leo the X. Charles Vth. Andrea Gritti of Venice Doge Wassili Ivanovitch conqueror of Astrachan founder of Russian greatness
2d Century Omar Ben Abdolaziz the most just sovereign of family of Ommia

Margin:
Prince Dschem Brother of Sultan Bajazet. who said “there is no blood between Kings” – the custom being to kill all the younger Sons. Dschem fled to Rhodes where the Knights entertained him. They were bought by the Sultan who paid 40 000 Ducats a year to them to keep him. He got to Nice. then to Chamberry then to Rousillon. Then by Rhone to Puy. Here the Kts took away & sent back to Rhodes 29 of his attendants. Bajazet offered the right hand of St John to deliver him up. The prince transferred from Castle to Castle. All European Kings tried to deliver him. & the Pope tried. The grand master put him in a tower with seven floors. Cellar Kitchen Servants 3, 4 & 5 rooms & bed of Prince 6 & 7th for Knights on guard. Charles VIII of france got him sent to the Pope in 7th year of captivity. he embarked at Toulon for Civita Vecchia & lived at the Vatican. Charles VIII took him & Pope in Cast St Angelo but poisend by the pope & got in dying state to Naples. his body sent to Egypt but went to Brusa & buried in Tomb of Amurath 2d.

In reigns of Soliman & Salim best time of Turks the greatest commanders by land & Sea were apostates from Xtianity. Hammer gives 8 out of 10 grand Visiers of this epoch.
Wlad & Drakul princes of Wallachia & Bosnia such murderers as surprized even the Turks.
But Selim 2d contemporary with Charles IX & Ivan the Cruel, St Bartholomews massacre at same time. Fort of Wittenstein in Finland taken garrison cut in pieces Commander spitted on a lance & roasted alive. This at time that Bragadino governor of Famagusta in Cyprus flayed alive by Selim the drunkard who being drunk slipped getting into a bath & got a fever & died.
Chaireddin Beglerbeg of Algiers carried off 70 000 of the persecuted moors from Spain to Africa. This Chaireddin tried to carry off from Fondi the great beauty Julia Gonzaga wife of Vespasiano Colonna Sister of the “divine” Joanna of Arragon painted by Raffaelle. She was to have been carried to harem of Turkish Sultan. The sailors of Barbarossa disembarked & She scarce escaped nearly naked behind a horseman whom She afterwards stilettoed. because “he had dared or seen too much”. In Solymans time, The turks played the devil in Fondi for 4 hours & particularly insulted the Virgin mary.
Hayreddin or Barbarossas own commentaries give all this He was of Greek descent a Roumelian Sipahi who settled in Mitylene at its conquest by Mahomet 2d. His father had 4 sons the first a Lesbian merchant the 3 others Pirates. Elias the youngest killed against Rhodians Urudsch or Horuc & Chisr or Chaireddin Pirates. They took a rich french Ship sent it to Sultan & had in return 2 caftans of honour & 2 gallies. They seized two African towns Budscha & Dscherdshill but fought for Algiers against Spain, Then the elder brother Isaac joined Them but he was killed by Spaniards storming Kalaatol Kalaat or the Castle of Castles. Kalaatol. Usdruch killed at capture of Telmessan but Chaireddin was Beglerbeg of Algiers. Sultan Selim sent him a scimitar a horse & a sandschak or investiture. Subdued for Sultan the native princes of Tennes & Telmessan.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 202

3
Kenz al mactoum = hidden Treasure.
Esm al aadem = the great name = [Arabic]
Motassem 8th Abasside Kalif first used Allah Billah = of God. Alallah by God, Lellah, Bemrillah &c by order of God, as Europans.
99 true names with Allah 100.
401 Paradise open to those who call often one of the 100 true names. whence 100 beads in Chaplets.
399 fatal year 613 Heg to Moslems. Franks Took Damietta, Moguls & Genghizkhan Persia ao 1216 & 17.
Moslems think Issa on 2d advent will make whole world Moslem ie unite Xtians
All held Moslem who ante Mahomet held the unity of God.

Tetekellem bel lisan el araby
[Arabic]
[Arabic] the dot for Bs often under [Arabic]

[Arabic] deus liberalis [Arabic] alla akram
than is [Arabic] men as [Arabic] The elephant greater than lion?
elfil acbar men alsabah the lion.
[Arabic] magnus [Arabic] major [Arabic] excellens
[Arabic] -tior. [Arabic]

wahat
etnin
talate
arbaa
khamse
sette
sabaa
tamanie
tessaa
achera
wahed achar &c
wahed ashar beit
tessa tashar rageol
that = kema p[...?] lam ma
utinam ia leit
vel = am – Sed = laken = bel
[Arabic] Ego me
ent Tu
hou ille
nahn nos
I go anaraieh.
ent raieh
illi leho
yes = enn / if laou
quia = laen. enho.
lo? houza = ha
yes = naam = bala
Meus [Arabic] – Ketabi
Tuus ak – Ketabak
apud me andi
in me vel habeo fii
in te fik
mihi, li. tibi lek
Quo abiit – ila hait rah.
inter = bein
nunquam = lacad.
Jam = cad
Quare = leaich.
how = keif
facat = solum
cras = rhada. hodie elioum

Margin:
marrat belboustan essoultan transivit

Quicumque me amabit hunc amabo = men iehobbeni ahobbo. [Arabic]

what you wish I wish = ma terid arid.

haïtma terouh arouh –

sabah el kheir
sabakoum bil keir. tu.
masa el kheir
entoum thaiiebin quom’ vales
thaiieb el hamd-lil-lah.
selam aleik
aleik es. Selam
marhabak. welcome.
rouh ma es selame. vade in pace.

Aleikoum es selam ou rehmet allah ou barakato.
Eich halkoum maoulana

Hegira has a T. at the end in fact as [Arabic] but commonly [Arabic]
[Arabic]
el Xamdu lillahi

Gell taccuino 6 pag 203

2
Kings of Cordova
Abderahman I – 171
Hixem I – 180
Alhakem I – 206
Abderahman II – 238
Muhamad I – 273
Almondhir 275
Abdala 300
Alhakem II 366
Hixem II preso – 399
Muhamad II el Mohdi Bila 400
Suleiman Almostain Bila 400
Hixem II 2d time 403
Suleiman Almn Bila 2d time 407
Aly ben Hamud – 413
Abderahman IV 412
Alcasim ben Hamud 413
Yahye ben Aly – 413
Abderahman V Almostadir Bila 414
Muhamad III ben Abderahman 415
Yahye ben Aly 2d time 417
Hixem III el Motad Bila 422
Gehwar ben Muhamad ben Gehwar
Muhamad IV ben Gewar Abulwalid

Reyes Xtianos de España y otros Principes
Rey Anfus
Armetos hijo de Constantin Rey de Grecia
Rey de Grecia
Alanfus Rey de Galicia
Teofilo Rey de los Griegos
Rey Garcia
Alfonso III Magno
Rey Radmir
do de Galicia
Rey de Afranc Borel
Conde Bermond
Conde Armengudi

Margin:
Califas
Walid ben Abdelmelic ben Meruan
Suleiman ben Abdelmelic
Omar ben Abdelaziz
Jezid ben Abdelmelic
Hixem ben abdelmelic
Walid ben jezid
Jezid ben Walid
Ibrahim ben Walid
Meruan ben Muhamad ben Meruan

Amires de España por los Califas de Damasco desde la conquista hasta 137 de la Hegira. 7mo de Jusuf el Fehri
Taric ben Zeyad el Sadfi
Muza ben Noseir el Becri
Abdelaziz ben Muza
Ayub ben Habib el Lahmi
Alhaur ben Abderahman el Tzakefi
Alsama ben Malic el Chulani
Ambisa ben Sohim el Kelebi
Hodeira ben Abdala el Fehri
Yahye ben Salema
Hodeifa ben Alhaus
Otman ben Abi Neza el Chemi
Alhaitam ben Obeid el Kenani
Muhamad ben Abdala
Abderahman ben Abdala el Gafeki
Abdelmelic ben Cotan el Fehri
Ocba ben Alhegag el Seluli
Abdelmelic ben Cotan segunda vez
Baleg ben Baxir el Caisi
Thaalaba ben Salema el Ameli
Husam ben Dhirar el Kelebi
Thueba ben Salema el Hezami
Jusuf ben Abderahman el Fehri

Principes Xtianos en este epoca
Ruderic Rey Godo de España
Tadmir Señor de tierra de Murcia
Eudon Duque de Aquitania
Carlos Martel Maire de la casa real de Francia,

Gell taccuino 6 pag 204

1
King No1??
Muhamad Alhayzari fled to Malaga but became King again. dethroned by 4th King
Pen and ink drawing with watercolour, Arabic motto: miniature
4th King
Mahomad Aben Ozmin fled from 5th King

[Complex genealogy]
Juzef K.G buried in Genealarife
1427
Brother
KG. Muley Mahomad Nazar 14
Aben Juzef Izquierdo or el Hayzari deposed by Muhamad el Zaquir his primo Pequeño 1430, but the usurper beheaded [symbol: therefore] Muley Alhayzari King again, Juzef Aben Alhamar next dethroned him. His sobrino nephew in 1444 Aben Ozmin deposed him
the 3d time
G.K. Muhamad Aben Ozmin was prince of Aben Ismail but Ismail was primo of Ozmin Ozmin slew many great persons in Alhambra.

Abu Ismail 5th King
Muley Abul Hacen 6 King = Zoraya Sultana
Abdallah Alcayde of Malaga
Abu Abdallah el Zaquir prisoner to K.g of Spain 7th & 9th & last Kg of Granada El Chico
Abdallah el Zagal 8th King. Granada Abu Abdilehi yields Almeria & Guadix 1491

El Zogoybi nephew of
El Zogoybi nephew of El Zagal.

Aben Ismail K.G. 1460
su prima = K.G. Muley Abul Hassan = Zoraya D of the Alcayde of Martos
Sidi Abdallah
Muhamad Abuabdilah
Cidi Yahye
Cidi Almayar.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 205

Inside back cover with full-length portrait and Arabic

Gell taccuino 6 pag 206

Back cover with shield and Arabic

Gell taccuino 6 pag 207a

K Muhamed el Hayzari
K Aben Ozmin
K Ismail

Zelim de Almeria
King Muley Hacen el Xeque in Alhambra = Zoraya Walida Sultana
Abdalla el Zagal Wali of Malaga Kg of Granad went to Africa 1491
Cid Yahye
Cid Alnayar
Muhamad abu abdallah el Zaquir KG
Albaycin
El Chico 1492 ended Kg of Gran

Nasar el Ansari
Juzef
born 1195 ob 1273 or 591 & 671
abu Abdala Muhamad I KG
Seville & Cordova taken
Muhamad 2d K.G. 1273

Gell taccuino 6 pag 207b

p 86 3 Volume handsome doncella from Almandhar taken to Granada

Nasar el Ansari
Jusef
Abu Abdallah muhamad KG born 1195 or 671 ob 1273
abu Abdala Mahamed 2d Sultan 1303 Muhamad K.G.
1306 built mosque & Bath ob 1235???
born 1195 or 671
ob 1273
1295 Sancho K. Spain
Ferag Wali de Malaga Ben Nasar 1306 = Sist. of Muhamd III
Nasar deposed by Ferag.
Ismail KV Granada
Muhamad K VIII G

Gell taccuino 6 pag 208a

Pencil, pen and ink drawing: gate
Bab el Adel
Five fingers allude to 5 precepts. Faith. Prayer. Alms. Fasting Pilgrimage.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 208b

Pencil drawing: gate
Puerta de siete Suelos
By this gate King went to deliver keys to Kg of Spain. went over hill of Los Martires and garden of present Convent. Then into ravine by Xenil to mosk now Hermitage of St Sebastian. Here is the record in the wall. Then went to his family across the Vega by hill of Tears so to that called the Moors last sigh.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 209, 209a, 209b

The Horse Guards at Granada.
Pen and ink drawing: gate
CASA DEL CARBON

The Casa del Carbon is nearly in centre of City, between the Zacatin & the Moorish bridge. close to the Darro, the Post house for Couriers & Cavaleriera. Built by Abu Alhamar. Some of The Horses of the breed of Nejdi some of Dongola – The Casa del Carbon not unlike a jewish house.

Gell taccuino 6 pag 209c

Pen and ink drawing: gate
Gate of Albaycin
GRANADA

Gell taccuino 6 pag 210

Pen and ink drawing: interior
Court of Cisterns
Five Arches or Half the Half The Hall of the Ambassadors
Door of Comares

Gell taccuino 6 pag 211

Pen and ink drawing: towers
Painters View of TORRES VERMEJAS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 213

Pen and ink drawing: interior
ALGEIRS

Gell taccuino 6 pag 214

Pen and ink drawing: mosque
5 pillars
2 trees
mosque at Tunis
TUNIS MOSQUE
